Edited by Omprakash Mishra · Souradeep Sen The World in Permacrisis Global Political Economy, Geopolitics and International Security

Global Political Economy, Geopolitics and International Security

Omprakash Mishra · Souradeep Sen Editors Global Political Economy, Geopolitics and International Security The World in Permacrisis

Editors Omprakash Mishra Jadavpur University Kolkata, India Souradeep Sen University of North Bengal Siliguri, India ISBN 978-981-97-2230-3 ISBN 978-981-97-2231-0 (eBook) https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-97-2231-0 © The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2024 This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed. The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use. The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and informa- tion in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or the editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations. This Palgrave Macmillan imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. The registered company address is: 152 Beach Road, #21-01/04 Gateway East, Singapore 189721, Singapore Paper in this product is recyclable.

Preface The present volume seeks to enquire into the drivers of permacrisis which has lately engulfed the world order, endangering international secu- rity through a cocktail combination of geoeconomics and geopolitical instrumentalities increasingly deployed in both narratives and practices of international relations of the nation-states. Most of the chapters in this volume have been developed by the authors out of the papers presented by them in an international confer- ence on Geoeconomics and International Security: Interrogating Contem- porary Trends and Manifestations at the University of North Bengal in January 2023. Some of the chapters, however, have been contributed by invited authors to add a few crucial aspects and issues not well covered in the conference proceedings. The authors were encouraged to update their writing in the light of the still raging Russian-Ukraine war and the newer international armed conﬂicts such as the Israel-Hamas war. The return of international war in the dynamic processes of world politics is reshaping inter-state relations and presenting acute challenges to the maintenance of the liberal international order. This is further endangered by the weaponi- sation of interdependence in the information, technology, commodity and energy spheres. Instead of contributing to positive engagement, facilita- tion and dispute resolution, the various arches of interdependence among nations are serving as instruments of pressure and coercion, of sanctions and restrictions. v

vi PREFACE The editors are grateful to the contributing authors and a very big list of reviewers for extending their fullest cooperation towards the timely completion of the manuscript of the volume. We are also indebted to Dr. Binayak Sundas, Adwitya Thapa and Rajyavishek Pradhan of the University of North Bengal for their support and assistance. Not least, the editors are indebted to the publishers Palgrave Macmillan and espe- cially for the two of their point persons Aparajita Singh, Associate Editor, and Hemapriya Eswnath, Project Coordinator, for their unstinted support throughout the past six months. Kolkata, India Siliguri, India Omprakash Mishra Souradeep Sen

Contents 1 Introduction: Context and Drivers of Permacrisis 1 Omprakash Mishra and Souradeep Sen Part I Theoretical Interventions into Permacrisis 2 Geopolitical Narratives and Decisions in Permacrisis: Reason, Emotion and Security 21 Anindya Jyoti Majumdar 3 Geoeconomics, Geopolitics, and the Contemporary International Order: Some Reﬂections 35 Shibashis Chatterjee and Abhinandan Kumar 4 In Search of Global South Liberalism: Prospects and Challenges 55 Gazala Fareedi 5 Resources, Economic Prosperity and International Conﬂicts 69 Saibal Kar Part II Understanding the Key Drivers of Permacrisis 6 On the Geoeconomics Drivers of International Conﬂicts 93 Apurba Kumar Bardalai vii

viii CONTENTS 7 International Diplomacy in the Era of Permacrisis: Competing Worldviews 113 Supreeta Mehta 8 The Changing Nature of Conﬂict and Ramiﬁcations on International Humanitarian Law 129 Shivani Gupta 9 ‘Idealist’s Dream or Realist’s Cudgel’: Examining Sanctions as Instruments of Statecraft 147 Souradeep Sen and Zaad Mahmood 10 Leverage in Energy Security: Weaponising For Good and Bad 171 Cauvery Ganapathy 11 International Security and Irregular Cross-border Migration in Times of Permacrisis 191 Sabahat Ambreen 12 International Management of Complex Humanitarian Emergencies: Challenges Ahead 209 Omprakash Mishra and Amartya Ray Part III Regional V ariations and Implications of Permacrisis 13 China’s Transition from ‘Peaceful Rise’ to ‘Chinese Dream’: A Critical Assessment of China’s Changing Narrative under Xi Jinping 227 Priyadarshini Ghosh 14 China’s Geoeconomic Manoeuvrings in Southeast Asia: Security Challenges and Implications 243 Tilottama Mukherjee 15 Neoliberalism, Geoeconomics and the Chinese Reality: The BRI Experience in Southeast Asia 257 Ishani Naskar 16 India’s Role in the Indo-Paciﬁc Region: An Overview of Strategic Geopolitical Convergences 275 Sayantani Sen Mazumdar

CONTENTS ix 17 Analysing Opportunities for India in Africa’s Economic Integration in the Context of the African Continental Free Trade Area 291 Abhishek Mishra 18 (Re) Positioning Myanmar in the India–China Congagement Politics 317 Sampurna Goswami Index 337

List of Contributors Sabahat Ambreen Milli Al-Ameen College, University of Calcutta, Kolkata, India Apurba Kumar Bardalai Indian Army (Retd.), Delhi, India Shibashis Chatterjee Jadavpur University, Kolkata, India Gazala Fareedi Southﬁeld College, University of North Bengal, Darjeeling, India Cauvery Ganapathy Dubai, UAE Priyadarshini Ghosh Maynaguri College, University of North Bengal, West Bengal, India Sampurna Goswami Sukanta College, University of Calcutta, Kolkata, India Shivani Gupta International Centre for Parliamentary Studies, London, UK Saibal Kar Centre for Studies in Social Science Calcutta, Kolkata, India Abhinandan Kumar Jadavpur University, Kolkata, India Zaad Mahmood Presidency University, Kolkata, India Anindya Jyoti Majumdar Jadavpur University, Kolkata, India xi

xii LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS Sayantani Sen Mazumdar Diamond Harbour Women’s University, Sarisha, India Supreeta Mehta Khudiram Bose Central College, University of Calcutta, Kolkata, India Abhishek Mishra MP-Institute for Defence Studies and Analyses, New Delhi, India Omprakash Mishra Jadavpur University, Kolkata, India Tilottama Mukherjee Syamaprasad College, University of Calcutta, Kolkata, India Ishani Naskar Jadavpur University, Kolkata, India Amartya Ray Thakur Panchanan Mahila Mahavidyalaya, Coochbehar Panchanan Barma University, Cooch Behar, India Souradeep Sen University of North Bengal, Siliguri, India

List of Figures Fig. 5.1 Relationship between GDP growth and military expenditure as % of GDP for country groups. Source Author’s calculations 78 Fig. 5.2 Long-run trends in military expenditure as % of GDP and GDPPC growth. Source Author’s calculations 79 Fig. 5.3 Relationship between military expenditure growth cycle and mineral rent growth cycle across country groups. Source Author’s calculations 80 Fig. 5.4 Military expenditure in US$vis-à-vis per capita GDP (both in logarithmic scale). Source Author’s calculations 86 Fig. 6.1 Source SIPRI arms industry database, December 2022 102 Fig. 9.1 Instance of Sanctions between 1965 and 2005. Source Hufbauer, Schott, and Elliott 2009 150 Graph 17.1 Trends in Africa’s foreign trade, 2011–2020 (in US$billion). Source Export–Import Bank of India 2022: 32 296 Graph 17.2 India’s major export destinations in Africa. Note India’s exports to Africa stood at US$13.4 billion in 2009–10 and US$28.5 billion in 2018–19. Source The Ministry of Commerce and Industry (MOCI), Government of India: and EXIM Bank Analysis 299 xiii

xiv LIST OF FIGURES Graph 17.3 India’s major import sources from Africa. Note India’s imports from Africa stood at US$25.6 billion in 2009–10 and US$41.1 billion in 2018–19. Source The Ministry of Commerce and Industry (MOCI), Government of India: and EXIM Bank Analysis 300 Graph 17.4 India’s major export items to Africa. Note India’s exports to Africa stood at US$13.4 billion in 2009–10 and US$28.5 billion in 2018–19. Source The Ministry of Commerce and Industry (MOCI), Government of India: and EXIM Bank Analysis 300 Graph 17.5 India’s major import items from Africa. Note India’s imports from Africa stood at US$25.6 billion in 2009–10 and US$41.1 billion in 2018–19. Source The Ministry of Commerce and Industry (MOCI), Government of India: and EXIM Bank Analysis 301

List of T ables Table 5.1 Impact of independent variables on military expenditure for country groups 82 Table 5.2 Impact of independent variables on military expenditure for countries 85 Table 17.1 Commodity dependence of Africa’s exports 295 Table 17.2 Pattern of India–Africa bilateral trade 298 Table 17.3 India’s overseas investments in Africa (US$million) 307 Table 17.4 Top African countries identiﬁed as per population and GDP and products with most potential to increase trade between India and Africa 311 Table 18.1 Sectoral cooperation in Myanmar: India–China compared 329 xv

CHAPTER 1 Introduction: Context and Drivers of Permacrisis Omprakash Mishra and Souradeep Sen Out of the crooked timber of humanity no straight thing was ever made. 1 The various chapters contained in this volume attempt to understand the contemporary landscape of international politics and how interac- tions and international relations of the countries have transitioned to the present complexity and crises. Being sceptical of mono-causal explana- tions, the volume incentivises analysis as an intellectually viable means to the realisation of the ends of security. A myriad of crises in the contem- porary world are gnawing away at the status quo. The point where the present differs from the past is perhaps with regard to the effects and manifestations of revision, whereby protracted crises are not necessarily 1 The quotation, originally in German, comes from Immanuel Kant. The customary English translation is by Isaiah Berlin (Berlin 2013: viii). O. Mishra (B) Jadavpur University, Kolkata, India e-mail: professor.mishra@gmail.com S. Sen University of North Bengal, Siliguri, India © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapor e Pte Ltd. 2024 O. Mishra and S. Sen (eds.), Global Political Economy, Geopolitics and International Security , https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-97-2231-0_1 1

2 O. MISHRA AND S. SEN culminating towards any commonly accepted notion of progress. Recog- nising the protean and crisis-prone nature of international politics—where crises at the unit level often coalesce to entrench the inescapable structural anarchy of the system—the volume attempts to locate, explain and predict the contemporary drivers and manifestations of permacrisis. 2 In tune with the perpetual relevance of the above quoted adage, it is argued that the contemporary context of international politics can be encapsulated within a neat continuum: from complexity to permacrisis. A brief inquiry into international history since the end of the Cold War may sufﬁce to inform the historical moorings of this volume. The end of the Cold War heralded a brief period of optimism, pivoting upon the ideological triumphalism of the Western bloc that was alleged to have won its global geopolitical contest against the Soviet Union-led Eastern bloc (Fukuyama 1992). As the realities of post-Cold War international politics have adduced, however, this triumphant euphoria generated its own set of contradictions. It was soon surpassed by systemic complexity and a consequent global dystopia of its own creation—often dubbed as the ‘return of geopolitics’ (Mead 2014). Various aspects of the post-Cold War era were directly responsible for the resultant complexity and the concomitant dystopia. First, the end of the Cold War did not necessarily imply the end of the clash among contending ideologies. In the unipolar moment, the US as the sole superpower or global rule-maker attempted to preserve the global status quo through the promotion of liberal democracy to its geopolitically relevant theatres (Mearsheimer 2018). The concomi- tant unleashing of globalisation processes powered by information and communication technology was expected to promote worldwide inte- gration at several levels. However, globalisation processes contained a strong element of fragmentation as well, complicating state-formation and nation-building projects in Africa, Balkans and the Middle East. Despite unipolarity, the post-Cold War era witnessed insurmountable challenges to international security, in the form of violent ethnic clashes, territo- rial and border disputes and intermixes of state interests and extremist violence. The state borders became fragile and externalisation of intra- state disputes and violent clashes brought to the fore massive forced 2 Permacrisis is a neologism denoting “an extended period of instability and insecurity, especially one resulting from a series of catastrophic events” (Collins English Dictionary 2023).

1 INTRODUCTION: CONTEXT AND DRIVERS OF PERMACRISIS 3 displacement, necessitating international attention and both unilateral and multilateral interventions. The developing unanimity in collective decision-making at the United Nations for addressing the myriad prob- lems of international security soon gave away to new set of disputes and contestation. Chieﬂy these stemmed from liberal international order’s antagonism with revisionist ideologies, such as ethno-nationalism, conser- vatism and authoritarianism (Cox 2017). The breakdown of international consensus on addressing the newer challenges to international security and maintenance of peace further led to the rise of authoritarian, state- led capitalism in Russia and, most importantly, in China (Allen 2023). The implications of these aspects become stark through unpacking several shifts in the contemporary balance of power. To begin with, the Russian Federation, although initially dependent upon American aid, not least, pliant—as evinced by its willingness to join the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)—towards the West, took an unexpected turn towards a revanchist foreign policy by the late 1990s. This complicated its relationship not only with the Common- wealth of Independent States (CIS) and the newly independent states of Eastern Europe (Galeotti 2022) but also with the West. Russia’s histor- ical ‘insecurity complex’—which increased its threat perception of NATO, thereby impelling a resort to revanchism since 2007—led to the creation of its resources-based ‘fortress economy’ in the country and to the projec- tion of a hyperrealist foreign policy entirely based on ‘spheres of inﬂuence’ in its neighbourhood and beyond. Russian revanchism, thus, engendered a chain reaction of threat perception within the Eastern European states, which impelled them to seek the military shield of the NATO and the prospective beneﬁt of associating with the European Union (Windsor 2006;A b e l o w 2022). Coupled with Russian revanchism in world affairs, the failure of state building and the formation of dysfunctional states in Africa, West and Southern Asia have led to the resurgence of two distinct, yet interre- lated, threats to international security and humanitarian sphere: non- international armed conﬂict and the return of international war. The ﬁrst has been witnessed across Africa, and in Afghanistan, Lebanon, Syria and Yemen, and of late, in the Israel-Hamas irregular warfare in West Asia. The second returned brieﬂy with the Russian invasion of Georgia (2008) and the dispute between Armenia and Azerbaijan over the Nagorno- Karabakh region in the South Caucasus; and then, massively with the protracted ‘war of attrition’ between Russia and Ukraine, since February

4 O. MISHRA AND S. SEN 2022. Apart from the perpetuation of antagonistic collective security organisations, the international system has been rife with geopolitical competition among great powers that resulted in the Russian occupation of Crimea, followed by nuclear proliferation in Iran and North Korea, and consequential nuclear force modernisation in the US, Russia and China (Cox 2020). Further, contemporary violent extremism and civil wars in pockets of Asia and throughout Africa, coupled with the parallel divisions of warfare into nuclear, conventional, asymmetric and hybrid genera- tions, have entrenched global refugee crises and complex humanitarian emergencies (Stephens and Baker 2006; Dyer 2023). As regards the global political economy, the ﬁfth wave of globalisa- tion fomented multilateralism among countries of the Global North and the Global South as well as further cooperation within the Global South (Chakrabarti 2016). Complex interdependence, engendered by globalisa- tion, enabled poorer states to experience high rates of growth that were further accelerated by the Global Financial Crisis (Zakaria 2011). The states in Latin America, Africa and Asia began to have, for the ﬁrst time, some say in global governance as a result of their economic heft. This ‘rise of the rest’—from India and China to South Africa and Brazil— and South-South cooperation also entailed a shift in the post-Cold War balance of power that culminated, through multipolarity, into the ‘rise of China’. With the largest GDP by purchasing power parity (Arends 2014), China has become increasingly assertive, and often, irredentist in world affairs; concomitantly, its ‘wolf warrior diplomacy’ has fomented conjec- tures of reinvigorating the ‘Thucydides Trap’ of belligerence with the US (Allison 2018; Martin 2021). Furthermore, the compulsions to sustain economic globalisation through unfettered supply chains have also propelled regional and global ﬁnancial instabilities, and attendant geopolitical competitions in devel- oping regions. The so-called post-American world order (Zakaria 2011) has thereby witnessed the creation of new narratives—such as the Asia– Paciﬁc and Indo-Paciﬁc—to designate potential zones of economic coop- eration and competition (Karnad 2015). It has also necessitated the emergence of plurilateral or minilateral economic groupings in the face of the seemingly insoluble antagonisms between revisionist Russia and China, on the one hand, and the pro-status quo Western multilateral institutions, on the other. Global political-economic shifts have gradually impelled the formation and expansion of new ﬁnancial institutions and regional organisations such as the G20, the BIMSTEC and the BRICS

1 INTRODUCTION: CONTEXT AND DRIVERS OF PERMACRISIS 5 to either increase the bargaining strength of the developing countries vis- à-vis the extant Bretton Woods Institutions or reduce their dependence thereupon (Stott 2023). Relatedly, China’s proclamation of its globally ambitious ‘Belt and Road Initiative’ (BRI) in 2013 has endeavoured to unhinge globalisa- tion and its attendant ﬁnancial institutions from their American moorings shape these in its own image and present these for the acquiescence of other states through an admixture of coercion and persuasion (Breslin and Xiao 2018). Concomitantly, since 2017, there has been the resur- gence of the Quadrilateral Security Dialogue (QUAD) to contain China’s economic inﬂuence in the Indo-Paciﬁc and the formation of the AUKUS in 2021 to check its geostrategic ambitions therein. Such formations have reignited debates on their role in fomenting the ‘competition dilemma’ of China vis-à-vis India and the liberal democratic extra-regional powers in the Indo-Paciﬁc, as well as their efﬁcacy in ‘congaging’ China (Elliott 2018; Chatterjee Miller 2021). These shifts in the contemporary balance of power impel the recog- nition that the liberal international order, created in the initial years of post-Cold War era, has been interminably assailed by several drivers of crises appertaining speciﬁcally to the domains of global political economy, geopolitics and international security. These drivers of crises have, concur- rently, entrenched global complexities to a point of no return, where- from—at least, retrospectively—the only signpost suggested a further slide from one crisis to the other. The curious fact, however, remains that despite being assailed by multifaceted and often seemingly insoluble crises, the liberal international order continues to persist. If indeed the imperfec- tions of international politics are but the surface reﬂections of the crooked timber of human nature, the present volume attempts to make sense not only of such imperfections, but also the functions of systemic persistence in the face of immanent and dystopian crises. Moving on, by 2019, various crises reached their critical points with further worldwide ecological alerts which culminated in the novel coro- navirus pandemic. Since before the pandemic, however, a new balance of power was gradually emerging that was informed by the enmeshed manifestations of the politico-economic, geopolitical and security drivers of international crises. For understanding the complexity of this balance and the concomitant nature of crises, scholars of IR were obliged not only to revisit dated theories, but also towards further conceptual inno- vations. In 1992, M. Mitchell Waldrop developed ‘complexity theory’

6 O. MISHRA AND S. SEN which has since then assumed major importance in the study of systems. For Waldrop, the components of the …complex systems are more spontaneous, more disorderly, more alive… [and] have somehow acquired the ability to bring order and chaos into a special kind of balance… often called the edge of chaos… where new ideas and innovative genotypes are forever nibbling away at the edges of the status quo, and where even the most entrenched old guard will eventually be overthrown… where seventy years of Soviet communism suddenly give way to political turmoil and ferment (Waldrop 1992: 12). Since Robert Jervis ( 1997) applied complexity theory to international relations, scholars of IR have gradually come to analyse strategic reali- ties of the post-9/11 era through its rubric. According to the votaries of ‘systemic complexity’, the context for strategies of war and peace has become more complex in the new security environment after 9/11, thereby impelling an urgent reformulation of strategic assumptions and choices. Arguably, permacrisis is the logical outcome of systemic complexity. The word, most widely understood as a portmanteau of ‘permanent’ and ‘crisis’, represents a contemporary inversion of ‘crisis’—as a necessary and beneﬁcial corrective towards progress. Conceived at the backdrop of Brexit and popularised in 2022, in the aftermath of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, permacrisis represents a narrative embodying “the dizzying sense of lurching from one unprecedented event to another”, with the trepida- tion of new horrors around the corner. It describes the feeling of living through an extended period of instability and insecurity in the forms of inﬂation, war and political upheavals (Turnbull 2022). Indeed the world has been through permacrisis before—as the global history of the previous centuries would adduce (Tooze 2022)—however, the permanent state of crisis that mankind has been collectively hurtling along, for the last few years, is perhaps more rapid, complex and insidious than those of any previous epoch for technological and ecological reasons. The description of the volume’s conceptual moorings is herein warranted. Following Edgar Morin ( 2008), it can be argued that since the tech- nological revolution, mankind has been residing within a network of interlocking systems and any crisis in one of those systems will engender a crisis in all the others. Previously, Morin and Kern had used the word ‘polycrisis’ to describe this situation where the most ‘vital’ problem of the

1 INTRODUCTION: CONTEXT AND DRIVERS OF PERMACRISIS 7 day was not any single threat but the “complex intersolidarity of prob- lems, antagonisms, crises, uncontrollable processes, and the general crisis of the planet” ( 1999: 74). Of late, the polycrisis has regained currency with such global shocks as the pandemic, diverse and worldwide ecological alerts, and threats of a third world war. For one observer, “[A] problem becomes a crisis when it challenges our ability to cope and thus threatens our identity. In the polycrisis the shocks are disparate, but they interact so that the whole is even more overwhelming than the sum of the parts” (Tooze 2022). What makes permacrisis distinct from polycrisis—albeit the former being a sublation of the latter—is its permanency despite the collective efforts towards the amelioration of speciﬁc crisis in well-deﬁned arenas. For addressing the immanent crisis of the international order, the present volume, therefore, suggests a multidimensional conceptual approach that synthesises the implications of the three key drivers of permacrisis, being at once mindful of the indeterminacies at the systemic level of inter- national politics. In other words, it argues that a system in permacrisis exudes ‘structural indeterminacy’. In a previous literature, Paul ( 2009: 8) has indicated that three features of the contemporary global security environment point at its ‘structural indeterminacy’: small events produce massive and unpredictable changes; the complex effect of multiple and uncoordinated interactions among a plethora of components causes insta- bility and the global structure; and its processes are ever in ﬂux—evolving, adapting and unfolding over time in a highly contingent manner. The contemporary validity of this formulation can be put to test. Since 2019, for example, the world has witnessed a resurgence of violent extremism and an unprecedented increase in cyber-attacks and an upsurge in the weaponisation of non-military instruments of coercion by states—Western sanctions against Russian oligarchs and Chinese digital- infrastructure ﬁrms, to wit. Furthermore, ‘structural indeterminacy’ has manifested through the COVID-19 pandemic, Russian inﬂuence opera- tions against the US and Western Europe, Chinese revanchism in South and Southeast Asia, Brexit and the US-China trade war, the US retreat from Afghanistan after two decades of failed counterinsurgency, the Russian invasion of Ukraine and the renewal of irregular warfare in West Asia. It is further argued that the global nodes of permacrisis point at the implications of systemic complexity, which emanate from a curious admixture of geopolitical templates and geoeconomic instruments of

8 O. MISHRA AND S. SEN statecraft. The traditional understanding of geopolitics—denoting the political implications of geography with some universal and some contin- gent elements—is based on certain principles which inexorably intertwine geography with peace and conﬂict, as perhaps their singular causative element. Classical geopolitics is thereby “concerned with questions of inﬂuence and power over space and territory”; it uses geographical frames or templates to make sense of world affairs; and, perhaps most importantly, traditional or classical geopolitics is future oriented, offering “insights into the likely behaviour of states because their interests” are considered to be fundamentally unchanging (Dodds 2019). This tradi- tional understanding of geopolitics has, since the waning years of the Cold War, manifested within the domains of global political economy in the form of geoeconomics. Since the 1990s, geoeconomics entered into the lexicons of interna- tional politics and strategic studies as a neologism denoting the “admix- ture of the logic of conﬂict with the methods of commerce—or … the logic of war in the grammar of commerce” (Luttwak 1990). It has been argued, over the years, that since the post-Cold War—unipolar moment in international politics—the military underpinnings of the concept of balance of power have been abruptly uprooted, only to be replaced with a new logic combining the economic and the military, with one feeding off the other or the economic often outweighing the military. This new balance of power, or geoeconomics, pivots upon the manipula- tion of economic instruments ranging from trade and investment policy, economic and ﬁnancial sanctions, to cyber, aid and energy commodities for achieving geopolitical goals. Western liberals had brieﬂy toyed with the claim that the geoeconomics of complex interdependence and global- isation would lead to the fragmentation and decentralisation of global networks of power relations, which would, in turn, make wars quite unnecessary (Blackwill and Harris 2016; Allison 2018). The other side of geoeconomics, however, has remained unexplained within the standard liberal template of complex interdependence: how the US, along with other Western states, has since the 1990s increas- ingly ‘weaponised’ interdependence for strategic advantage (Farrell and Newman 2019). This has engendered the systemic complexity perpet- uating insecurities and has ultimately snowballed into permacrisis. With the decline in US hegemony and the rise of China, the same geoeconomic instruments are now being deployed by the latter for coercive ends, which has only entrenched the self-same crisis (Allison 2018; Spalding 2022).

1 INTRODUCTION: CONTEXT AND DRIVERS OF PERMACRISIS 9 The instruments of geoeconomics never function in isolation, requiring as they do a state’s unique mastery of the hard instruments of soft power and a signiﬁcant level of military capability. In determinate ways, states’ geopolitical objectives stimulate the deployment of synthetic coercive strategies that may blur the distinction between military and economic instruments. As the contemporary conditions of global complexity and permacrisis could not diminish the pressures that lead to wars, interde- pendence has instead become the new battleground (Galeotti 2021). The weaponisation of geoeconomic instruments is having far-reaching impli- cations for international security—where the lines between war and peace may seem to have been blurred into near-irrelevance in a world of perma- nent low-level conﬂict—often undeclared, where the actors may keep changing sides. Insofar as international security is concerned, systemic complexity and permacrisis have synthesised an array of non-traditional threats with tradi- tional ones. Synthetic threats to international security have now been presenting insurmountable challenges not only to the sovereignty of states, but also to the viability of non-state actors and civil societies. As outright state-on-state warfare of the old kind has become less useful and less affordable—evinced by the ongoing Russian invasion of Ukraine is now assuming an unprecedented hybridity: resulting from the symbiosis between its military and economic aspects. We may have entered a time when there is talk of the weaponisation of information and ICT tools, global supply chains of strategic materials and energy resources, labour, private military contractors (PMCs), not least, platforms of games and sports, cultural symbols and practices, as well as the strategies to counter climate change. Although the list is endless, not all states are equipped to juggle geoeconomic and security imperatives seamlessly. Nor is every state or region particularly adept at sanctioning or rewarding detractors and supporters, respectively, for lack of hard power capabilities. Such states in the peripheral regions of the world economy are often at the receiving end of the coercive spectrum of great power politics. Ergo, there are stark regional variations vis-à-vis state capacities of wielding geoeconomic and geopolitical instruments to further the ends of national security. The treatment of permacrisis as the context informing contemporary international politics, as at once the cause and the effect of interna- tional politics—through the historical and conceptual inquiry into its provenance—yields three speciﬁc questions. These questions have been variously addressed within the 17 contributions to the present volume:

10 O. MISHRA AND S. SEN 1. Given the contextual particularities and cyclical causality of perma- crisis, what theoretical interventions/innovations are necessary to understand the phenomenon, as well as the causes and functions of the persistence of the international system? 2. What are the constituents of the contemporary global political- economic, geopolitical and international-security drivers of perma- crisis, and how are these causally related to one another as well as to their effect? 3. How can the regional/state-wise variations and implications of the drivers of permacrisis be accounted for, especially vis-à-vis their effect on the global distribution of its consequences? Concomitantly, the volume is divided into three sections: the ﬁrst, entitled ‘Theoretical Interventions into Permacrisis’—ranging from Chap- ters 2 through 5—comprises the theoretical interventions into the drivers and implications of systemic complexity and permacrisis. The section comprises four distinct interventions that are primed towards abstrac- tions, generalisations and predictions vis-à-vis the nature of contemporary international politics. These are informed variously by the realist, eclectic, liberal and political-economic approaches to international politics. The section begins with Anindya Jyoti Majumdar’s theoretical explo- ration into the nature and signiﬁcance of geopolitical constructs vis-à-vis permacrisis. The chapter underscores how geopolitical narratives intri- cately shape the approach and decisions of human being and interna- tional politics within the framework of what he considers the KARMA Loop. Majumdar discusses the cyclical causality of permacrisis by empha- sising the growing importance of oppositional narratives and counter- hegemonic perspectives as challenges to the liberal world order. The author suggests that decision-making on security within geopolitical constructs may not rely solely on reason, but is inﬂuenced by emotional responses and perpetuated through evolving narratives. Shibashis Chat- terjee and Abhinandan Kumar view the contemporary international order as an intricate fusion of geoeconomics and geopolitics and elucidate it through three logics of order, control and exceptionalism. The authors employ this eclectic framework to analyse the constitution and function- ality of the international order, with each of the logic representing the geopolitical landscape, geoeconomic aspect and the impact of reliance on state structures during uncertain times. In a different vein, Gazala

1 INTRODUCTION: CONTEXT AND DRIVERS OF PERMACRISIS 11 Fareedi contends that globalisation has paradoxically led to the weaponi- sation of interdependence. Fareedi analyses the persistence and indispens- ability of contemporary systems of interdependence, multilateralism and global governance institutions vis-à-vis the preservation of liberal values, exploring thereby the possibility of reconceptualising and encapsulating these within the narrative of Global South Liberalism as the means to preserve the liberal international order. Finally, from the perspective of global political economy, Saibal Kar hypotheses the internal economic drivers of international conﬂicts, exploring the conditions that prompt states to engage in border aggression despite the risk of economic sanc- tions, signiﬁcant losses and other international repercussions. His analysis underscores the complex interplay of economic woes, resource access and geopolitical decisions that shape the crisis-ridden state of contemporary international politics. The second section or ‘Understanding the Key Drivers of Permacri- sis’—from Chapters 6 through 12—builds on the theoretical interven- tions in the ﬁrst. The section comprises the key empirical studies of the volume into the nature and instruments of the three key drivers of contemporary permacrisis—geoeconomics, geopolitics and international security. It builds the narrative of permacrisis, based upon the analysis of the interrelationships and interactions among its key drivers. The ﬁrst three chapters of this section, respectively by Apurba Kumar Bardalai, Supreeta Mehta and Shivani Gupta, build on the recognition of the present complexity vis-à-vis non-international armed conﬂicts and the return of international war. Bardalai posits the impact of the contemporary internationalisation of armed conﬂicts on national and regional security. He illustrates the intricate relationship between international security and geoeconomics in extant theatres of conﬂict, thereby inferring that conﬂicts have become the means to pursue the strategic interests of states that have very little interest in conﬂict resolution. Furthering the discussion on conﬂict, Supreeta Mehta begins her inquiry by recognising the negative impact of permacrisis on the legitimacy of the liberal international order. Mehta opines that as the existing major powers try to hold on to their spheres of inﬂuence and new ones try to seize control, a tug of war, with multiple rope ends, has ensued. She attempts to explain the key drivers of permacrisis through pointed analyses of the Russia-Ukraine War and the looming crisis in the Indo-Paciﬁc region. The complex interplay of conﬂict and diplomacy in the previous entries ﬁnds further expression in

12 O. MISHRA AND S. SEN Shivani Gupta’s chapter, where she incentivises an in-depth analysis of the Russia-Ukraine War and irregular warfare between Israel and Hamas to explicate the ramiﬁcations of these on international humanitarian law. Gupta highlights the uncertainty induced by these conﬂicts, inﬂuencing geopolitical alliances, economic crises, energy alternatives and mass migra- tion. To address these challenges, she advocates a targeted overhaul of the existing regime of international humanitarian law. From a different empirical standpoint, Chapters 9 and 10 focus on the geoeconomic drivers of permacrisis, especially the contemporary weapon- isation of economic sanctions and energy architecture. As regards the ﬁrst, Souradeep Sen and Zaad Mahmood explore the popularity of sanctions as instruments for preserving the liberal world order. Arguing that utility and efﬁcacy of sanctions are not to be taken on face value, the authors propose—through a systematic case study of sanctions regime on North Korea, Venezuela and Egypt—a ‘triangular credo of utility and efﬁcacy’. Emphasising the uniqueness of each sanctions case in the light of domestic and international factors, the authors conclude that no universal criteria can strictly determine sanctions’ efﬁcacy in today’s interdependent world. Cauvery Ganapathy assumes a similar tack in her contribution. She argues that strategies for energy self-sufﬁciency are now urgent and yet complex due to multiple pressures. The author unravels the ways in which the pursuit of energy security amid permacrisis fosters international tension. She advocates for a new energy architecture that addresses the issue of fossil fuel inequalities and the indispensability of renewable and clean energy in reshaping the international energy security paradigm. Through her analysis of energy as a geoeconomic driver of permacrisis, Ganap- athy reimagines energy imperatives and urges for a collective response to transform the global energy landscape. The section concludes with two contributions that explore the rami- ﬁcations of permacrisis on human security. Speciﬁcally, the argument in Sabahat Ambreen’s contribution highlights the intricate relationship between security issues and irregular migration, where each exacerbates the other. Additionally, the absence of lasting solutions for protracted refugee situations ampliﬁes the ongoing migrant crisis, thereby snow- balling into permacrisis. Ambreen infers that this perpetual state of crisis intertwines security challenges with migration issues, underscoring the complexities faced by states, non-state actors and individuals amid a land- scape dominated by non-military conﬂicts and threats to human security. Omprakash Mishra and Amartya Ray notch up the discussion by analysing

1 INTRODUCTION: CONTEXT AND DRIVERS OF PERMACRISIS 13 the ubiquity of Complex Humanitarian Emergencies (CHE) in the post- Cold War era, attributing the causes thereof to the ﬂuid and fragmented nature of state formation since the 1980s. The authors examine the inter- national community’s role in mitigating CHE, by analysing existing legal frameworks and institutional arrangements, and underline the doctrine of ‘responsibility to protect’ (R2P). Mishra and Ray also explore various intervention strategies in CHE and analyse the potential impacts of such interventions. The third section, or the ‘Regional Variations and Implications of Permacrisis’—from Chapters 13 through 18—builds on the thought- composite of the ﬁrst and the second sections. It informs the empirical interventions and debates—from a strategic and area studies angle— into the regional/state-wise variations and implications of the drivers of permacrisis. The causes and implications of the composite drivers of permacrisis have found systematic treatment though the analysis of geopo- litical regions such as the Indo-Paciﬁc, South and Southeast Asia and Africa. Explicit within these analyses is a consistent focus on the impact of a triadic great power competition among the US and its allies, on the one hand, China and its client states on the other, and a resurgent and strategically autonomous India as the third pole in the competition on the stability of the fragile strategic balances of these regions. The challenges posed by China to the liberal international order and the implications of Chinese foreign policy for permacrisis have received comprehensive treatment in the contributions of Priyadarshini Ghosh, Tilottama Mukherjee and Ishani Naskar. Ghosh examines China’s ascent and assertiveness, particularly in Southeast Asia and the South China Sea. Chronicling the transition of Chinese foreign policy from the cautious era of Deng to the ‘Chinese Dream’ of Xi, Ghosh focuses on the latter. The Xi Jinping era represents an overt challenge to the global status quo through various attempts to revise geopolitical narratives. Mukherjee shifts the focus to the impact of the ‘Chinese dream’ on South- east Asia. Emphasising Chinese geoeconomic strategies—especially post the South China Sea imbroglio—she argues that these approaches have only heightened Southeast Asian states’ concerns about China and the consequent recalibration of their ties with China’s global competitors. Mukherjee suggests that China could build trust through geoeconomic instruments, drawing parallels with the earlier approach of the US, if it wishes to retain regional support for its ‘Chinese dream’. Naskar reaches similar inferences, in her contribution, albeit following a different tack.

14 O. MISHRA AND S. SEN Understanding geoeconomics as the ﬂipside of neoliberal interdepen- dence which has been transformed by the Chinese foreign policy under Xi, Naskar infers that Asia’s complex geopolitical and geoeconomic factors, including multilateralism, are shaped by China’s pivotal role in balancing regional stakeholders. The author explores this dynamic process through examples of regionalism and sub-regionalism in Southeast Asia. Moving from the east to the west, the focus in the three concluding chapters of the section is variously on Indo-Paciﬁc, South Asia and Africa. Sayantani Sen Mazumdar contributes further to the discussion of China’s geoeconomic inﬂuence over and geopolitical incursions into the Indo- Paciﬁc. She also brings to the forefront India’s balancing role in the region. Elucidating the complex interplay among the three key drivers of permacrisis, Sen Mazumdar argues that despite its economic potential, a plethora of security risks pose signiﬁcant challenges to the Indo-Paciﬁc maritime realm, thereby addressing a few crucial questions vis-à-vis the emerging crisis in the Indo-Paciﬁc region. The author emphasises the necessity for a collaborative dialogue among the major stakeholders which may pivot on India and China’s geo-centrality to the region. Also emphasising the strides in India’s foreign policy, Abhishek Mishra explores India’s strategic approach towards Africa within the context of the African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA). In the process, he underscores India’s multifaceted strategy vis-à-vis Global Value Chain (GVC) integration, infrastructure development, and trade and ﬁnance facilitation to realise the potentials of what would constitute the world’s largest free trade area. Mishra advocates for a durable partnership between India and the countries of Africa, stressing India’s interest in the conti- nent as both economic and geopolitical. Sampurna Goswami argues that since contemporary international politics leans towards integration, India-China relations are increasingly shaped by efforts in regional and sub-regional contexts to foster comprehensive development and reduce the dependence of the Global South on the great powers. The author highlights Myanmar as a case where both India and China are engaged in development initiatives, attempting cooperation but simultaneously trying to contain and outdo each other. She further explores the intricate dynamics of India-China interactions in Myanmar within the framework of regional integration. Given the brief description of the chapters comprising the volume, it comes as no surprise that a phenomenon as extensive and entrenched as permacrisis cannot be fathomed within the conﬁnes of a single volume.

1 INTRODUCTION: CONTEXT AND DRIVERS OF PERMACRISIS 15 Although the volume has attempted to encapsulate the theoretical, tactical and processual aspects of permacrisis within the practicable limits imposed by spatial constraints, certain gaps or limitations vis-à-vis its research foci can be identiﬁed. Such gaps emanate not from the complete absence of a nodal issue or region vis-à-vis the volume’s central theme, but from the parsimony of references to such issues or regions within its conﬁnes. Such limitations can, in the obverse, inform the future research agenda on permacrisis, its key drivers and circular causality and the regional vari- ations and implications thereof. In this regard, the following themes are relevant: the impact of Artiﬁcial Intelligence on systemic complexity and permacrisis; the role of cyber as a geoeconomic instrument of statecraft; the implications of rapidly growing Chinese-owned and operated global digital infrastructure; the interplay among geoeconomics and the emer- gent ﬁfth generation warfare and the environmental drivers of permacrisis. As regards area studies, future research on permacrisis and its practicable correctives shall pivot on interdisciplinary studies of regions in the Global South, from Latin America to Africa, since these regions may become the future testing grounds for the application of diverse geopolitical narratives and geoeconomic instruments. References Abelow, B. 2022. H o wt h e W e s t b r o u g h t w a rt oU k r a i n e. Siland Press. Allen, B. 2023. Beijing rules: China’s quest for global inﬂuence. John Murray. Allison, G. 2018. Destined for war: Can America and China escape Thucydides’s trap.S c r i b e . Arends, B. 2014, December 4. It’s ofﬁcial: America is now No. 2. Market Watch. https://www.marketwatch.com/story/its-official-america-is-now-no- 2-2014-12-04. Berlin, I. 2013. The Crooked Timber of Humanity: Chapters in the History of Ideas.2 nd Ed. Pimlico. Blackwill, R. D., and Harris, J. M. 2016. War by other means: Geoeconomics and statecraft. Harvard University Press. Breslin, S., and R. Xiao. 2018. China and Global Governance. In International organization and global governance, 2nd ed., ed. T.G. Weiss and R. Wilkinson, 325–335. Routledge. Chakrabarti, S. 2016. Global South rhetoric in India’s policy projection. Third World Quarterly 38 (8): 1909–1920.

16 O. MISHRA AND S. SEN Chatterjee Miller, M. 2021, October 13. The Quad, AUKUS, and India’s Dilemmas. Council on Foreign Relations. https://www.cfr.org/article/quad- aukus-and-indias-dilemmas. Cox, M. 2017. The rise of populism and the crisis of globalization: Brexit Trump and beyond. Irish Studies in International Affairs 28: 9–17. Cox, J. 2020, June 8. Nuclear Deterrence Today. NATO Review. https://www. nato.int/docu/review/articles/2020/06/08/nuclear-deterrence-today/. Deﬁnition of ‘permacrisis’. 2023. Collins English dictionary. https://www.collin sdictionary.com/dictionary/english/permacrisis#google_vignette. Dodds, K. 2019. Geopolitics: A very short introduction. Oxford University Press. Dyer, G. 2023. The shortest history of war. Picador India. Elliott, J. 2018, January 22. As China expands its footprint, India could look at ‘Congagement’. The Wire. https://thewire.in/diplomacy/china-expands-foo tprint-india-look-congagement. Farrell, H., and A.L. Newman. 2019. Weaponized interdependence: How global economic networks shape state coercion. International Security 44 (1): 42– 79. Fukuyama, F. 1992. The end of history and the last man. Free Press. Galeotti, M. 2021. The weaponization of everything: A ﬁeld guide to the new way of war. Yale University Press. Galeotti, M. 2022. Putin’s wars: From Chechnya to Ukraine.O s p r e y . Jervis, R. 1997. System effects: Complexity in political and social life. Princeton University Press. Karnad, B. 2015. Why India is not a great power (yet). Oxford University Press. Luttwak, E.N. 1990. From geopolitics to geo-economics: Logic of conﬂict, grammar of commerce. The National Interest 20: 17–23. Martin, P . 2021. China’s civilian army: The making of wolf warrior diplomacy. Oxford University Press. Mead, W.R. 2014. The return of geopolitics: The revenge of the revisionist powers. Foreign Affairs 93 (3): 69–79. Mearsheimer, J. 2018. The great delusion: Liberal dreams and international realities. Yale University Press. Morin, E. and Kern, A.B. 1999. Homeland earth: A manifesto for the new millennium. Hampton Press. Morin, E. 2008. On complexity. Hampton Press. Paul, T.V. 2009. Complex deterrence: An introduction. In Complex deterrence: Strategy in the global age, ed. T.V. Paul, P .M. Morgan, and J. Wirtz, 1–27. The University of Chicago Press. Spalding, R. 2022. War without rules: China’s playbook for global domination. Bantam. Stephens, A., and N. Baker. 2006. Making sense of war: Strategy for the 21st century. Cambridge University Press.

1 INTRODUCTION: CONTEXT AND DRIVERS OF PERMACRISIS 17 Stott, M. 2023, August 22. Brics bank strives to reduce reliance on the dollar. Financial Times. https://www.ft.com/content/1c5c6890-3698-4f5d-8290- 91441573338a. Tooze, A. 2022, October 28. Welcome to the world of the polycrisis. Financial Times. https://www.ft.com/content/498398e7-11b1-494b-9cd3- 6d669dc3de33. Turnbull, N. 2022, November 13. Permacrisis: What it means and why it’s word of the year for 2022. The Indian Express. https://indianexpress.com/article/ explained/explained-culture/permacrisis-word-of-the-year-2022-8266210/. Waldrop, M. M. 1992. Complexity: The emerging science at the edge of order and chaos. Simon and Schuster. Windsor, P . 2006. Strategic thinking: An introduction and farewell. Viva Books. Zakaria, F. 2011. The post-American world and the rise of the rest. Penguin.

PART I Theoretical Interventions into Permacrisis

CHAPTER 2 Geopolitical Narratives and Decisions in Permacrisis: Reason, Emotion and Security Anindya Jyoti Majumdar Human existence is besieged with a plethora of newer challenges brought forth by every passing day. Very frequently, the challenges turn into crises and threats of different nature at various levels—from individual through national to global. The feeling that ordinarily persists therefore is hardly upbeat and most of the time, pessimist thoughts pervade actions. The immediate task becomes—not really to aspire for resolving issues perma- nently—but to somehow manage the instantaneous challenges, in order to delay the eventual catastrophic future. However, people cannot live without hope, and therefore, optimistic narratives of the future, based on the protection of certain fundamental values like freedom, justice, equality, peace and sustainable development among others, are perceived and projected as desirable, even essential, goals of mankind. A combina- tion of hope and despair shapes the global environment, or to be more A. J. Majumdar (B) Jadavpur University, Kolkata, India e-mail: anindyajyoti.majumdar@jadavpuruniversity.in © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapor e Pte Ltd. 2024 O. Mishra and S. Sen (eds.), Global Political Economy, Geopolitics and International Security , https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-97-2231-0_2 21

22 A. J. MAJUMDAR speciﬁc, elements of hope in despair drive the mankind towards relentless experiments for, at least, perceived near-perfect arrangements. While the experiments continue for fault-free or better alternatives, pending the emergence of such a perfect world, survival and security of core interests predominantly guide the policies of states thereby forming the foundational substance of international politics. At the international level, dynamic and fragile power arrangements often change and novel challenges emerge necessitating attempts to understand the new reality, and fresh assessments usually focus on areas hitherto ignored or viewed as merely tangential. As a result, the geopolitical perceptions of the world change frequently. New terms and new vocabulary emanate from the quest to explore the changing realities and a conglomeration of amended theories becomes the order of the day. This process is essential, natural and fashionable at the same time. This contribution seeks to understand the nature and signiﬁcance of geopolitical constructs and endorses the hypothesis that geostrategic, geoeconomic and geo-cultural strands of policy, though separated for academic convenience, are in effect the manifestations of a combination of different strategies designed and utilised to fulﬁl the goals of geopolitics, i.e., security, survival and interest-promotion, within a framework of suit- able narratives. While hegemonic narratives are usually projected by the powerful, counter-hegemonic narratives too are formed by the rest, often branded as anti-geopolitics. In the process, the chapter explicates (a) how the interconnections between the opposites increasingly assume greater signiﬁcance; (b) how the geopolitical narratives (and counter-narratives) subsume every aspect of our existence; and (c) how we tend to move within a loop, identiﬁed as the KARMA Loop herein which postulates that making decisions on security might not be entirely based on reason. It is a make-believe world of geopolitical constructs that operates by evoking emotional response and uses new terms and jargons to remain relevant and contemporary. Geopolitics and Geopolitical Narratives Conventionally, geopolitics pre-supposes geography’s conditioning inﬂu- ence upon history and politics as geographical settings ordinarily set the limit upon a state’s strategic destiny. The perceptible impact of a country’s geographical settings on its policies is easily discernible and such attributes may result in either advantage or disadvantage for that country. A state

2 GEOPOLITICAL NARRATIVES AND DECISIONS … 23 can easily identify its obvious physical attributes and try to adopt policies to either reduce disadvantages or use those attributes to its advantage. It is quite apparent that the continental and the maritime countries, or the island nations and landlocked countries would have different orienta- tions in policy-making conditioned by geographical limitations or access to strategic resources or routes. However, over-emphasis on geographical conditions leads to geographical determinism—a mono-causal explana- tion that fails to explain state behaviour in totality. Nevertheless, the attempts to formulate grand designs based on worldwide geographical lay-out require sweeping generalisations and labelling vast areas with particular characteristics, tags and identities. In order to re-interpret the world suitable to the preferences of the interpreter, imagination steps in and the ﬁne line between reason and emotion tends to get blurred. Geopolitics is, therefore, “an intriguing concoction of reality and imagination” (Majumdar and Bose 2021: 8 4 ) .A sar e s u l t ,g e o p o - litical explanations often take the shape of narratives. And the moment we move into the realm of geopolitical narratives, geopolitics acquires larger-than-life dimensions. In simple terms, The world is actively spatialized, divided up, labeled, sorted out into a hier- archy of places of greater or lesser ‘importance’ by political geographers, other academics and political leaders. This process provides the geograph- ical framing within which political elites and mass publics act in the world in pursuit of their own identities and interests (Agnew 2003:3). Indeed, places are identiﬁed and labelled using geographical descriptions, metaphors and templates generating a simple model of the world guiding security and foreign policies of states, and in the process, such labels generate particular understanding of places, communities and accompa- nying identities (Dodds 2007:4). ‘North’, ‘South’, ‘East’ and ‘West’ are not merely cardinal geographical directions. These are used as tags, each having underlying immensely powerful imageries in international rela- tions. For example, labelling a few countries as ‘failed’ states, ‘rogue’ states (O’Reilly 2007), ‘torn’ states or ‘swing core’ states and explaining their behaviour by such yardsticks (Huntington 1996: 244) is common in international practice. Knowing how the notions, perceptions and imagi- nation inﬂuence policy prescriptions may also reveal deliberate attempts to impose identities for strategic manipulation. None of these terms however have any validity in international law but prove convenient for political

24 A. J. MAJUMDAR strategising. In effect, we deal with imagined geographies and imposed identities, as pointed out by various scholars—not unlike Anderson’s ‘imagined communities’ (Anderson 1983) as socially constructed ideas. These are essentially elements of narratives and not of systemic theories. Geopolitical narratives emerge because of the attempts to understand, explain, theorise and interpret the interplay of time, space and actor dimensions of international transactions. A narrative can be deﬁned as a way of establishing inter-linkages among events in order to present a unique account that is attractive, easy to understand and which often invokes emotional attachment. In the process, identities are invented or manufactured, and in most cases, identities are artiﬁcial constructs giving birth to myths. Reality then is a perceived reality that depends on what one intends to believe or accept. In other words, multiple realities coexist at the level of cognisance. Geographical representations inﬂuence people’s perception of this world and as Dodds argues, “in that sense we are all geopolitical theorists” (Dodds 2007:11) but our understandings might differ radically for ethnic, religious, political and other reasons. More than facts, the interpretation of facts contributes to making of perception (or misperception) and very often, perceptions become more powerful than facts though perceptions may generate a false sense of reality. A geopo- litical narrative can be an intoxicating cocktail combining imagination, emotion, myth and subjective interpretation of facts which is skilfully presented as rational explanation of events thereby justifying policies. Policies are, in fact, cocooned within narratives. Espousing the notion of ‘cognitive dissonance’ Robert Jervis explains, when one set of beliefs clash with another, a person tries to minimise dissonance by ﬁnding new reasons or by rearranging his beliefs to support the original actions rather than making a policy change. According to him, one of the common misperceptions is ‘overestimating one’s importance as Inﬂuence or Target’ (Jervis 1976: 343). Once coupled with geopolit- ical narratives, cognitive dissonance and misperceptions can very well lead to miscalculations and result in slip-ups in policies. Here, emotion over- powers the rational actor, imagination clouds reason. Rationality suggests that emotion should be subservient to reason but very often they coexist, correlate and converge in policy-formulation. Over time, new world order arrangements take shape forcing change in perceptions and attitudes inﬂuencing policies. “The geopolitical perspec- tive is dynamic”, argues Cohen, “it evolves as the international system and its operational environment change” (Cohen 2009: 3) and “radical

2 GEOPOLITICAL NARRATIVES AND DECISIONS … 25 geopolitical restructuring is a continuous process” (Cohen 2009: 29). A particular narrative focuses on particular space, time and actors. The transition from Cold War to post-Cold War arrangements has spawned multiple narratives including that of ‘War on Terror’ or more recently, of a tussle between the ‘Authoritarian Regimes and the League of Democracies’. Consequently, certain geographical places acquire strategic signiﬁcance and are transformed into imagined spaces—be it the micro ‘Af-Pak region’ in the ‘war on terror’ or the macro ‘Indo-Paciﬁc’ in a tussle between authoritarian regimes and the democratic states. Obvi- ously, leadership variables provide directions to policies and help build new narratives. In the last few years, Xi Jinping’s Chinese Dream— i.e., making China great and a strong country with world class forces through an assertive ‘wolf warrior’ diplomacy—has formed the image of a belligerent China. India’s approach, on the contrary, is to exclaim faith in V asudhaiva Kutumbakam (i.e., the world is a family) and thereby on the one hand, to maintain independent relations with each and all and on the other, pushing multilateralism as the preferred option. “Most geopolit- ical visions portray the world as divided between two systems, with one’s own nation in a strategic position either to defend the cause of right or to act as an intermediary”, argues Dijkink. In fact, “The self-deﬁnition as a bridge between East and West is very popular on the Eurasian continent (Germany, Russia and India)” (Dijkink 1996: 141). Not merely between the East and the West during the Cold War period, self-deﬁnition as a bridge between two extremes continues to be dominant in India even in the post-Cold War phase, predominantly between the North and the South. One can think of several popular phrases that emerged immediately after the end of Cold War. For example, the ‘end of history’ thesis proclaimed that all ideological conﬂicts have now been resolved because of supremacy of liberalism (Fukuyama 1992). Again, the idea of ‘clash of civilizations’ charted out possible course of future conﬂicts (Huntington 1997). A catchy phrase would indicate a narrative, be it the ‘new world order’ or ‘war on terror’. Even the so-called strategies like the ‘string of pearls’ or the ‘necklace of diamonds’ are not more than narratives; the ideas have never been ofﬁcially endorsed by either China or India. Whether a theoretical explanation, policy/strategy formulation or expo- sition on perceived reality—indeed there is no dearth of narratives and each narrative has rational and emotional elements roiled into it.

26 A. J. MAJUMDAR Geopolitics, it may appear, is less about peace and more about conﬂicts—actual or potential. While dominant geopolitical constructs are often motivated and biased, they represent the existing patterns of the world order as projected by the major powers of the day. Perhaps from being essentially Eurocentric or ‘Western’ in nature, contemporary geopolitics would have to adjust and adapt to changing power equations in Asia. However, it is the contest between the narratives that determines the turns and twists of history and the propensity of conﬂicts and feasi- bility of durable peace. Despite the assertion that over time, the impact of geography on state behaviour might not be even important, much less decisive and the ﬂawed research programmes of political geographers would slide further into irrelevance (Fettweis 2015: 248), geopolitics continues to bounce back in different forms. Again, while often criticised as misrepresentations that fail the test of empirical analysis—‘inherently unfalsiﬁable, unscientiﬁc’ (Fettweis 2015: 237)—some such geopolitical formulations, like the cultural–geographical model of ‘the clash of civi- lizations’, frequently resurrected, garner support by appealing to fear psychosis. A simple reason why geopolitics fails in rigorous scrutiny is that geopolitical expositions are essentially narratives and not theories based on coherent logic. Call it geopolitical vision or mere imagination based on re-interpreting geographical dimensions, once the basic undertone of the geopolitical narrative is set, policies tend to follow and these geopolitical narratives subsume geoeconomic, geo-cultural and geostrategic issues—in effect, all policies stem from the grand narrative and get automatically justi- ﬁed. Realist goals of accumulation of power, security and dominance are realised in the garb of liberal principles of democracy promotion, market access and regimes. Each segment of human transaction is ‘weaponised’ to achieve maximum advantage. Geoeconomics, therefore, is not about replacing geo-strategy, i.e. economic power is not replacing the mili- tary power, nor it signiﬁes merely benevolent commercial transactions bringing nations together. Geoeconomic strategies including weaponisa- tion of trade, value chains, tariffs, concessions, sanctions and debt-traps are all in effect instruments to fulﬁl geopolitical goals, i.e. in simple terms, security, survival and dominance. Concentration of global supply chain facilitated rise of China. Apprehension about China’s growing belliger- ence has led the West towards de-risking by locating other investment destinations. Geoeconomics is an important component of all-embracing

2 GEOPOLITICAL NARRATIVES AND DECISIONS … 27 extensive geopolitics; the same may be said about geo-cultural endeavours as soft power weaponries. Geopolitics is often deﬁned loosely and the popularity of the term has made it almost synonymous with international politics. As a result, geopolitics becomes much like an umbrella term that is continuously spinning stories about this world incorporating new issues, establishing linkages with events and setting new targets and tools. Fresh geopolitical narratives are formulated to subsume newer elements into the main- stream—ethnic assertions and identity, climate change, forced migration, pandemic—in short, whatever one can think of. It usurps all emerging issues and re-moulds them into its own framework. In this sense, the extent or the scope of geopolitics is limitless and exceptionally extensive. The COVID-19 pandemic can actually provide a fascinating case study of extensive geopolitics. A communicable disease attaining a virulent form killing people worldwide demanded a collective response from the comity of nations. Instead, it soon got mired in geopolitical narratives and counter-narratives. While suspicions over its origin and nature and the debate on whether a biological weapon was released deliberately or accidentally reﬂected the mistrust states retain against each other, the competition to acquire medicines and protective kits and consequent vaccine diplomacy followed the usual self-help approach. Bringing in a virtual stop to movements and connectivity during the period when COVID-19 was at its peak, the pandemic established once again the fact that international organisations often fail to come up with collective response when needed, while states look for relative gains, even at a time of common crisis and shared challenge to mankind. In this connection, one needs to take note of critical geopolitics and counter-narratives as opposed to conventional geopolitical narratives. Critical geopolitics emphasises that orthodox geopolitics is hazy, erro- neous, distorted and simplifying. Geography is about power. It is not a product of nature but a product of histories of struggle over power to occupy, organise and administer space. To the dominant narratives, resis- tance and contestations are obvious. The counter-hegemonic narratives, termed as ‘geopolitics from below’ or ‘anti-geopolitics’, come from the (strategies and tactics of) civil society movements and the (oppositional discourses of) dissident intellectuals (Ó Tuathail, Dalby and Routledge 1998: 245). How the geopolitical entities are constructed, how different alternative geopolitical arrangements can be imagined and how dissi- dent arguments contest ofﬁcial versions contribute to critical geopolitics

28 A. J. MAJUMDAR (Ó Tuathail1996; Tuathail, Dalby and Routledge 1998:312). Reference can be made to Michel Foucault’s view of geopolitics as a metaphor for the operation of power in general and geography as a discourse is form of power/knowledge; or to Yves Lacoste’s idea of geography as a strategic form of knowledge closely linked to a set of political and military prac- tices; even to Edward Said’s views of Orientalism that reveals how knowl- edge of other cultures is created and disseminated (Ó Tuathail1996). In the process however, better arrangements for individuals are visualised under various categories like alternative, post-structural or subaltern. Reality is contextualised and socially constructed. The obvious outcome is formation of other narratives that are counter-hegemonic in nature. Following Foucault, there are no relations of power without resis- tances, with contestation by those who have faced forms of domination, exploitation and subjection. This counter-hegemonic resistance (against the state) takes the form of ethical and cultural force challenging the idea that state’s interests are identical to the community’s interests. It challenges (1) the material geopolitical power of states and (2) the domi- nant representations imposed by political elites. Therefore, a distinct set of ideas that focus upon peace and not power projections, nego- tiated settlement of disputes and not use of force, sustainable devel- opment and not economic inequalities form the crux of the substance of ‘anti-geopolitics’, opposing the traditional geopolitical assumptions and justiﬁcations. While state behaviour sustains and endorses tradi- tional geopolitics, anti-geopolitics is sustained by international networks of groups, organisations, civil society and social movements. It presents a narrative of hope and aspiration against the security-centric narratives of fear and frustration (Ó Tuathail, Dalby and Routledge 1998). As a result, we have hegemonic discourses forged by the powerful as well as counter-hegemonic discourses of the marginalised leading to spin- ning of narratives of different kinds. For both groups, their respective positions are rational and correct as per their convictions. This moulds the attitude of the protagonists and shapes their approaches to issues of security, the referent object being either the state or the individual. The zeal to prove each other wrong and expose the fallacies of each other’s positions also pre-supposes a signiﬁcant extent of emotional commitment to respective narratives. One can always visualise unrestrained ﬂow of goods, services, tech- nologies and investments creating jobs for millions and resulting in mutual economic gains, regional and civilisational harmony leading to

2 GEOPOLITICAL NARRATIVES AND DECISIONS … 29 the absence of inter-state conﬂicts. However, suspicions and obstruc- tions on ground prevent any worthwhile movement towards these goals. The counter-narratives of peace, equality, cooperation and mutual beneﬁt that may pose serious opposition to the entrenched geopolitical ideas are sought to be appropriated by the state as well. These counter-narratives ﬁnd their expressions at the declaratory level of the state but very little is actually done at the ground level creating a mismatch between what is said and what is done (Majumdar and Bose 2021) leading to habitual double-speak of most politicians. Despite the nationalist narratives harping on protecting and promoting national interests, common global concerns are fast becoming integrated with national interests. The binaries—geopolitical narratives and counter- narratives of anti-geopolitics—represent the opposites. “More than the contest between geopolitics and anti-geopolitics, a dynamic combination of the two shapes contemporary global politics; and conﬂicts and peace remain dependent upon a balanced blend of both” (Majumdar and Bose 2021:95). The interconnections repeatedly manifest themselves and can hardly be ignored. When the interconnection is missed, the perspective becomes more emotional in content than rational. T he Element of Emotion and the Interconnections of Opposites Approaches to perceived (or misperceived) existential threats are usually inﬂuenced by a combination of instinctive response, emotional reac- tion and attempted rational decision-making. There are always formal/ informal, systematic/unsystematic attempts to interpret issues and thereby to inﬂuence opinion of a larger body, and in the process, narra- tives come into being often abridged in innovative words and phrases. Throughout history, new words have emerged (each carrying with it a particular narrative) and become a part of our perceptions. Recent addi- tions to the lexicon to understand the conditions of present-day human existence are no exceptions to geopolitical constructs. For example, the sense of living through an extended period of instability and insecurity caused by social, economic and political turmoil is termed as permacrisis. It is a new addition to the vocabulary to explain the world we live in but hardly there has been a period of lasting stability and enduring peace at the global level in the past. In fact, peace and stability are essentially

30 A. J. MAJUMDAR sought after by all but the process usually results in a favourable arrange- ment for the big powers often by subjugation of the weak or by ignoring their aspirations. Even the very structured bipolar arrangement of the Cold War days, that put a plethora of disparate challenges under a cloak of intense ideological competition, was not free from crises. We live and will continue to live in permacrisis. The word permacrisis could be a novel addition to the lexicon but the spirit has been living with us for centuries. In other words, permacrisis is the constant state of affairs for the mankind. Likewise, following Adam Tooze, another such term in vogue now is polycrisis. It refers to the complex, disparate and cross-cutting set of challenges. Though the French theorist Edgar Morin used the term in the 1990s, Tooze popularises the term and explains that “the shocks are disparate but they interact so that the whole is even more overwhelming than the sum of the parts” (Tooze 2022). Both these terms—permacrisis and polycrisis—are examples of attempts to understand the contempo- rary complexities. These terms visualise a complex matrix of challenges of various types requiring multifarious responses and try to convey that practically nothing can be viewed in isolation. All these terms are however hazy and have deeper meanings—in fact, many meanings—than what they prima facie convey. Further, the meanings are often distorted because of the degree of intensity of emotional attachment we have with them. This has one interesting implication. Single-cause explanations become increasingly irrelevant making ﬁxed solutions untenable. Broadly, we cannot say any more, for example, that capitalism is the root cause of all evils and communism is the solution; or realist approaches make the world unsafe and intense liberalism is better suited to solve problems. Interconnections are increasingly becoming important in understanding continuity and change and the tussle between opposite positions or extremities. Interconnections between opposites; between realism and liberalism; reason and emotion; theories and narratives often present themselves as pragmatic choices and binaries are necessary only to high- light possible linkages. In fact, geopolitics identiﬁes interconnections, subsumes those into a construct and projects a suitable narrative for circulation. Geopolitical narratives create space for emotion to be accommodated in rationally thought-out schemes. In this sense, it is marginally different from post-truth. Post-truth is deﬁned as a political culture in which debate is framed largely by appeals to emotion and perceptions and repeated assertion of beliefs ignoring factual data. Geopolitical narratives however

2 GEOPOLITICAL NARRATIVES AND DECISIONS … 31 may use factual data but interpret those in ways that evoke emotion and help create desirable perceptions. Counter-hegemonic geopolitical narratives are not different so far as these narratives seek to promote a cause. T he KARMA Loop: Combining Reason and Emotion There are many approaches to understand the process of decision-making with different kinds of variables being adhered to ranging from rational actor model to leadership idiosyncrasy, from cost–beneﬁt calculus to bio- political subjectivities. We often however take decisions on the basis of the amount of knowledge that we might have—extensive or inadequate, as the case may be—and also the degree of our attachment to a particular issue. Prioritisation that is made is not always based on reason. In fact, these days, yet another term—Emotional Intelligence—has gained huge popularity. If one goes by the book by Daniel Goleman, emotional intel- ligence has reconciled what had been seen as two opposites: our feelings and our reasoning (Goleman 2021: ix). Once again, we ﬁnd a set of inter- connections between two apparently diverse platforms. We need not go deep into the psychological aspects that the term emotional intelligence suggests, but taking a cue from the basic concept and applying it to inter- national politics, it is perhaps possible to argue that to manoeuvre the environs in the interest of meaningful survival one should be abreast of the changes and must measure the extent of one’s association or emotion with the change as a pre-condition for decision-making. In other words, it is possible to think of an almost universal common process that in successive stages seeks to respond to the environment. Such a process involves a few constituting elements: (1) Knowledge: It is crucial to acquire near-total knowledge of the existing geopolitical environment (hegemonic and counter- hegemonic) and the process primarily includes data collection or trends identiﬁcation (information) and subjective interpretation of collected data of various types (implications). Interpretation of data is done by the leadership with the help of the team of experts. Insti- tutions developed over time are also geared to perform such tasks with elaborate arrangements of agencies dedicated to data collec- tion and expert advice. Usually applying a cost–beneﬁt calculus and necessary trade-off between policies, decisions are made and these

32 A. J. MAJUMDAR decisions, though termed as rational, often manifest attitudinal elements of the interpreters. (2) Association: Identifying and prioritising linkages with various segments of geopolitical environment and how the actor is linked or associated and the extent of emotive attachment with partic- ular issues inﬂuence decision-making. Without emotive association, one remains indifferent to an issue, which explains selective engage- ment and different treatment on the part of the states with regard to same types of issues in different parts of the world. Based on beliefs and convictions, perceptions and preferred interpreta- tions, association with a particular space or issue is formed and the degree of attachment/association determines the intensity of efforts towards a positive outcome. This re-endorses attitudinal elements into decision-making. (3) Recognition: This signiﬁes understanding and recognising the limits and potentials of the actor’s tangible and non-tangible capabilities and the extent of skill of materialising desirable delivery or inﬂu- encing the probable outcome. This may involve utilising hard, soft or smart power instruments and unless the goals correspond to the abilities of the state, any design or plan would remain a mere dream and not be counted as the interest of the state. Recognition of abili- ties in the context of desired outcome remains a crucial component in decision-making. (4) Manoeuvre/Modulation: Based on the above three, choosing the most plausible path considering the constraints, challenges, permitted opportunities, scope available and the intensity of attach- ment at a given point of time leads to applicable strategies. At this stage, the narratives are formed, modiﬁed and circulated as appropriate tools to manoeuvre or modulate the environment in the context of which the decisions are applied. (5) And ﬁnally, Application: This may be regarded as the ﬁnal stage of pursuing the path/policy with suitable vocabulary (spearheading particular narratives) assumed or designed to be acceptable to a larger audience and fulﬁl the goal of desired outcome. Since the application of decisions (on the part of various actors) impacts on the existing state of affairs and reshapes it and because response to change is a form of change itself and introduces new elements, new knowledge base is created and once again we go back to the ﬁrst

2 GEOPOLITICAL NARRATIVES AND DECISIONS … 33 premise. It is a kind of loop that endlessly continues. It is to be kept in mind that at each step, there is ample scope for the interplay of human ingenuity or human error, mistakes and follies. The process does not guar- antee optimum efﬁcacy of decisions. And unlike the virtual world, there is no provision of backspace or delete keys and it is impossible to undo what has already been done. If one picked up the ﬁrst letters of the aforemen- tioned steps of decision-making in permacrisis—Knowledge, Association, Recognition, Manoeuvre/Modulation and Application—it would turn out as K-A-R-M-A in its abbreviated form. The process therefore can be marked as the KARMA Loop that combines the crises and response to crises in cyclical order. Indeed, it is the KARMA then that determines the outcome. Conclusion In ﬁne, it may be said that geopolitical constructs help explain the percep- tion of the political environment in which we live in, and every other aspect of human life—broadly economic, cultural or social—becomes component of grand geopolitical narratives, hegemonic or counter- hegemonic. These are subsidiaries though they may acquire prominence depending on the demands of time but the geopolitical goals of security remain supreme and keep inﬂuencing policies and actions in other ﬁelds. New terms like ‘permacrisis’ or ‘polycrisis’ in effect denote a constant state of affairs that is unstable and dynamic in nature, which in turn enhances the scope, enriches the content and keeps extending the geopolitical horizons. Multiple geopolitical narratives can simultaneously coexist leading to multiple realities. More than the binaries, it is crucial to identify inter- connections between the opposites. The opposites do not lose their distinctiveness as far as ideas are concerned, but for effective policies, a judicious combination of different perspectives needs to be followed. Since decisions cannot be entirely based on reason but also depend on intensity of attachment, narratives necessarily aim at invoking attachment while projecting the decision as rational. The decision-making process operates within a loop as decisions them- selves are important enablers of change impacting on existing situations. It is therefore an endless process that keeps responding to the changing envi- ronment. The KARMA Loop explains how such decisions are made. It is pertinent to locate the interconnections between reason and emotion to

34 A. J. MAJUMDAR understand the motives behind decisions. The KARMA loop ﬁts into the geopolitical framework of decision-making as in search of security, both combine reason and emotion to deal with a world where reality is open to multiple interpretations and deliberate manufacture of suitable narra- tives. The end result often turns out to be an unsatisfactory compromise of what is desired, what is feasible and what is prudent. References Agnew, J. 2003. Geopolitics: Re-visioning world politics. Routledge. Anderson, B. 1983. Imagined communities: Reﬂections on the origin and spread of nationalism. Verso. Cohen, S. B. 2009. Geopolitics: The geography of international relations. Rowman and Littleﬁeld. Dijkink, G. 1996. National identity and geopolitical visions: Maps of pride and pain. Routledge. Dodds, K. 2007. Geopolitics: A very short introduction. Oxford University Press. Fettweis, C. J. 2015. On heartlands and chessboards: Classical geopolitics, then and now. Orbis, Spring, 233–248. Fukuyama, F. 1992. The end of history and the last man. The Free Press. Goleman, D. 2021. Emotional intelligence: Why it can matter more than IQ . Bloomsbury India. Huntington, S.P . 1997. The clash of civilizations and the remaking of world order. Penguin. Jervis, R. 1976. Perception and misperception in international politics. Princeton University Press. Majumdar, A.J., and Bose, S. 2021. Geopolitics, conﬂicts and peace. In Peace and conﬂict studies: Perspectives from South Asia, ed. by Majumdar, A.J., and Chatterjee, S. Routledge. O’Reilly, K.P . 2007. Perceiving rogue states: The Use of the “Rogue States” concept by U.S. foreign policy elites. Foreign Policy Analysis 3 (4): 295–315. Tooze, A. 2022, October 28. Welcome to the world of polycrisis. Financial Times. Ó Tuathail, G. 1996. Critical geopolitics. Routledge. Ó Tuathail, G., Dalby, S., and Routledge, P . (eds.). 1998. The geopolitics reader. Routledge.

CHAPTER 3 Geoeconomics, Geopolitics, and the Contemporary International Order: Some Reﬂections Shibashis Chatterjee and Abhinandan Kumar Geoeconomics is never autonomous. It is ultimately predicated on the political and military balances across the world. As the international system has steadily moved away from the US-led unipolar one to an unpredictable multipolar order, the attendant risks have also multiplied alarmingly. The ongoing war in Ukraine and the Chinese assertions in the Asia–Paciﬁc bear ominous portends for global stability and order. The military and political power of the US and the EU is declining; the norma- tive goals underpinning the present order are being contested; major powers are increasingly becoming uncompromising in maintaining domi- nance in their respective spheres of inﬂuence; exclusionary politics and protectionist policies are on the rise; and, most signiﬁcantly, conﬂicts are increasing in many parts of the world. On top of this, we witness massive S. Chatterjee (B) · A. Kumar Jadavpur University, Kolkata, India e-mail: shibashis.chatterjee@gmail.com © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapor e Pte Ltd. 2024 O. Mishra and S. Sen (eds.), Global Political Economy, Geopolitics and International Security , https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-97-2231-0_3 35

36 S. CHATTERJEE AND A. KUMAR existential challenges over the decay and decline of global commons. The climate crisis and the threat of pandemics threaten human existence as never. This mosaic of complexities requires that we read the economic, the geopolitical, and the social not in isolation but in interrelations. This contribution delineates the contemporary international order as an insep- arable intertwining of the texts of geoeconomics and geopolitics. We understand the contemporary order in terms of three logics. The ﬁrst is the logic of order, where we ﬁnd the simultaneous articulations of networks and territorial spacing. The second is the logic of control where the state has reworked its regulatory functions since markets have increas- ingly steered into crises. This has led to muscular nationalist tendencies along with a rise of right-wing populist forces worldwide. Third, we witness a logic of exceptionalism that builds on the uncertainties of the pandemic. It is found that science has once again strengthened the cause of sovereignty at a critical hour. The more we depend on the state, the easier it is for the state to bend us for our good (or bad). And the more we think like the state, the lesser is the extractive cost of the state to imple- ment demanding measures that would at some stage prove costly to the people. A theory is, as Kenneth Waltz wrote famously, ‘a picture, mentally formed, of a bounded realm or domain of activity. A theory is a depic- tion of the organization of a domain and the connections among its parts’ (Waltz 1979: 8). Hence, we contend that the logics of order, control, and exception are deployed to make sense of the way the international order is constituted, its functionality and modes. In our conception, the logic of order reﬂects the geopolitical landscape, the logic of control represents the geoeconomic aspect, and the logic of exceptionalism underscores how reliance on state structures during uncertain times can lead to an increase in state power. By examining these three logics in conjunction with each other, we aim to blend geopolitics, geoeconomics, and political theory in making sense of these tectonic shifts upon social structures that reproduce the recursive logics of existence across time and space. I Orders are central to the way states live. In IR theory, there is a long-established tradition that distinguishes between systems and orders. Hedley Bull’s contribution is seminal in this regard. In Bull’s words, “Where states are in regular contact with one another, and where in addi- tion there is interaction between them sufﬁcient to make the behaviour

3 GEOECONOMICS, GEOPOLITICS … 37 of each a necessary element in the calculations of the other, then we may speak of their forming a system” (Bull 1977: 10). On the other hand, “A society of states (or international society) exists when a group of states, conscious of certain common interests and common values, form a society in the sense that they conceive themselves to be bound by a common set of rules in their relations with one another, and share in the working of common institutions” ( 1977: 13). The contrast is based on the idea of an instrumental association of states based on mutual needs and a deeper communion raised on shared purposes. This reﬂects the German sociologist Ferdinand Tönnies’s celebrated differentiation between the two ideal types that he named the Gemeinschaft (communal society) and the Gesellschaft (associational society) (Tönnies and Harris 2001). Cooperation seems easier when states share values and cultural norms, although the violence of the modern European societies that culminated in the brutalities of the two World Wars put a big question mark on this association. Geopolitical rivalries and conﬂicts have existed simultaneously alongside economic cooperation, trade, global businesses, and the ritual- istic agreement among most states on creating a peaceful order based on democratic norms and the rule of law. Most states, like individuals, prefer predictability to uncertainties and fuzziness, patterns over randomness, order over disorderly conduct and stability over instability. The desir- ability of order is therefore not in doubt. States, nonetheless, fail to unite on what kind of order is preferable. Moreover, states disagree as to the degree of permissible inequality in constructing the order, the ways of order making, and the need to sustain or transform orders (Lascurettes and Poznansky 2021). Any description of the present order would have to pay attention to these four dimensions. The ﬁrst formulation we develop is that the present epoch, like all periods in the past, is constituted by the logic of order, where we ﬁnd the simultaneous articulations of networks and territorial spacing. It is essen- tial to note that while we refer to the ‘logic of order’ in this context, it should not be confused with the broader concept of international order, which encompasses a more comprehensive set of norms, rules, and power structures governing the global arena. In the sense of logic, order is more akin to the process of ordering, the way a totality comes into being through the interactions of agency and structure (Wendt 1987; Klotz et al. 2006). We develop this formulation by concentrating on two works, the ﬁrst by Anne-Marie Slaughter and the second by John Mearsheimer, as these are contrasting illustrations of orders based on the

38 S. CHATTERJEE AND A. KUMAR logic of networked spaces (Anne-Marie Slaughter) and structural anarchy- driven geopolitical rivalries (John Mearsheimer). This would lead us to describe the four axes of the present order—what it means; who are the architects; how is it built; and whether it is in crisis? Anne-Marie Slaughter ( 2004) argues that governments are “aggrega- tions of distinct institutions with separate roles and capacities” ( 2004: 13) that make the international networks absolutely pivotal. In her words, “appreciating the extent and nature of existing government networks makes it possible to envision a genuinely new world order” ( 2004: 15). The pluralistic reading is essential since “the analytical lens of the unitary state obscures the very existence of these different government institu- tions” ( 2004: 13). She shows that governmental networks constitute “a pattern of regular and purposive relations among like government units working across the borders that divide countries from one another and that demarcate the ‘domestic’ from the ‘international’ sphere” ( 2004: 14). Normatively, she upholds “a system of global governance that insti- tutionalizes cooperation and sufﬁciently contains conﬂict such that all nations and their peoples may achieve greater peace and prosperity, improve their stewardship of the earth, and reach minimum standards of human dignity” ( 2004: 15). This would happen through networks, which she describes as the “foundation of a full-scale disaggregated world order” ( 2004: 132). The treatment here is both descriptive and prospec- tive. Moreover, the allusion to the order is both empirical and normative, married imaginatively ( 2004: 133). Networks, both within states and in world affairs, would be the catalyst to the change in the international order—the ushering in of an interconnected market-order that would be controlled exclusively neither by the state nor by the market. This is surely not a new imagination. From Karl Deutsch to Robert Keohane and Joseph Nye, the liberals have consistently argued for a transformed reality predicated on the culture of deep interdependence successfully socialised through the intergenerational elites. This happens in spite of the geopolit- ical divide. The need for cooperation in increasingly complex domains of collective actions, some of which are existential to our survival, ultimately trumps the competitive dynamics of the anarchical order. The realist position, articulated most notably by John Mearsheimer, highlights the futility of cooperation under the perpetually anarchical environment. This logic is based on the premise that “international relations is not a constant state of war, but it is a state of relentless secu- rity competition, with the possibility of war always in the background”

3 GEOECONOMICS, GEOPOLITICS … 39 (Mearsheimer 1994: 9). The prospect of states cooperating to thwart the negative effects of this constant security competition is highly unlikely primarily for two reasons: considerations of relative gains as opposed to absolute gains, and concerns of cheating by other states. He critiques the theories that argue that institutions can effectively promote peace, namely liberal institutionalism, collective security, and critical theory, for their ﬂawed causal logic and the inadequate empirical evidence in their support. According to him, order “is an organized group of international institutions that help govern the interactions among the member states” (Mearsheimer 2019: 9). He recognises the vitality of orders in managing interstate relations in an economically and militarily interdependent world but makes a critical distinction between bounded and international orders. While bounded orders have limited membership, are regional in scope, and provide a framework for security competition among major powers, international orders are characterised by universal membership and aid in fostering cooperation among major powers. However, the institu- tions that constitute international orders lack autonomous authority. They serve as tools of powerful states and are designed to inﬂuence weaker states’ behaviour in alignment with the great powers’ interests. More- over, whether the prevalent order will be realist, agnostic, or ideological depends on the distribution of power among the great powers and not on their individual ideological preferences ( 2019: 12). In other words, even if the two major powers happen to be liberal themselves, the resultant international order born out of the security competition between them will be realist. The order can be agnostic or ideological (e.g., liberal) only under unipolarity depending on the ideological inclination of the unipole. Thus, in Mearsheimer’s view, distribution and balance of power are independent variables that determine the nature of order, while insti- tutions and ideological preferences are merely intervening variables in the process. These contrasting perspectives of Anne-Marie Slaughter and John Mearsheimer have continued to shape discussions about the evolving nature of the international order. However, the fact is that while political realism correctly indicates at the structural dissonance among states in an anarchical setup bereft of any central regulatory authority, the liberal insis- tence on interconnections between states (and societies) based on trade and commerce, cultural exchanges, shared social norms, institutional link- ages, and the need to abide by commonly recognised legal standards have, on balance, moderated the impacts of structural anarchy to a considerable degree.

40 S. CHATTERJEE AND A. KUMAR We understand order as any recurrent patterns of interactions sustained over a period of time. The complexity of any given order betrays many permutations and combinations that cannot be reduced to any singu- larity. It is always a combination of varied patterns. The contemporary order is multipolar in terms of the distribution of military power, capitalist but increasingly inward-looking, ideologically divergent, and politically volatile. It is loosely committed to multilateral institutions and practices. However, many emerging powers contest the rules and framework of this multilateral order and want a transformation of many key elements of it (Lake et al. 2021; Bajpai and Laksmana 2023). The contestations are both internal and external (Adler-Nissen and Zarakol 2021). There are states like China and Russia that contest the order militarily and in terms of geo-strategy. Yet, China is committed to an open trading system and a globalised economy that is consistent with its economic interests. States like Russia, Iran, and North Korea, on the other hand, are high- risk states. They are capable of military mobilisations if their vital interests are compromised. What constitutes these interests is tricky. For Russia, these are mostly territorial, demographic, and strategic; for Iran, these stem more directly from its political identity; for North Korea, it is about regime survival through aggressive regional policies. The Western states, the traditional pillars of the contemporary global order, are increasingly divided over the issues of globalisation and protectionist policies, the imperatives of welfare and immigration, liberal values, and strong polit- ical regulations of borders and societal norms (Vuorelma 2020). The US, in particular, is caught in a bind. On the one hand, it stands ﬁrmly to protect the present order. On the other, it seems ambivalent on what needs securing. Is order automatically set by invisible structural dynamics or is it consciously created by powerful states? Again, there is no easy answer to this question (Lascurettes and Poznansky 2021: 9). Aspects of the order are the results of macro-sociological changes over long periods that include ideas, values, and expectations. Institutions and national attributes are largely created by the elites through conscious policy interventions. Geopolitical rivalries are always set in an environment that cannot be reduced to discreet national choices. Similarly, economic policies largely depend on structural factors like levels of technology, knowledge, specialisation, aspirations, and the nature of social classes. Individual choices undeniably matter, but without favourable structural factors these seldom materialise in the ﬁrst place. We, therefore, witness

3 GEOECONOMICS, GEOPOLITICS … 41 both macro-transformation and agential action in the making and contes- tations of the present order. How the order is made is a political question. The established powers blend structural dynamics and concerted collec- tive action as triggers to order making. The revisionist states usually rely on the arguments of national action. Finally, while the contemporary conﬁguration is claimed as quintessen- tial and unchangeable by the traditional proponents of the liberal inter- national order, it is believed to be irreversibly altered by its detractors. The stability argument takes many forms. First, realists are in any case loath to change—they see no possibility of any systemic transformation of the international system. They claim structural anarchy to be irreversible. Only the distribution of power or the polarity of the system changes from one period to another (Waltz 1977). Liberals of course are committed to change. But, as the works of Alexandre Kojève in the past and Francis Fukuyama in our times have shown, liberals can also freeze transforma- tions by arguing the ideological triumph of liberalism over all its rivals (Roth 1985; Fukuyama 1992). The neoliberals make similar arguments based on the unshakeable sovereignty of the market (Keohane and Nye 1989). This perspective allows technological changes but negates polit- ical transformation. All changes thus become rudimentary and superﬁcial; they do not usher in anything fundamentally novel. The critiques of the liberal order, in sharp contrast, see the order crumbling in front of our eyes. This is partly because of the inherent ﬂaws of the order itself (Mearsheimer 2019); but it is also the result of revolutionary changes in technologies of communication arising out of globalisation and the simul- taneous rise of economic nationalism that has undermined the advances of the same globalisation process (Kornprobst and Paul 2021). The economic and political consequences of such rapid transformation in trends cannot be predicted accurately. Much of this argument is unde- niably based on conventional nationalist sentiments and favours changing the given power structure by democratising the prevailing order based on Western dominance. However, the claims of power transition apart, there is little engagement with the wider conﬁgurations of the given order, its purposes, and its direction. The contemporary order, like orders of the past, remains open ended on the possibility of change.

42 S. CHATTERJEE AND A. KUMAR II Our second formulation concerns the logic of control which relates to the changes in the role of the nation-state. The contemporary times have shown an extraordinary attraction to the authoritarian and strong leader, often accompanied by the resurgence of masculine orientations and hierarchical political control even within formal democracies. This largely involves the reworking of identities through populist politics, prompting the need for fresh reﬂections. The rise of right-wing populist forces is partly the result of states losing their traditional control of borders and a remarkable escalation in competitive regulatory protec- tionism the world over. It has also gained strength due to the growing emotional insecurities of the people resulting from the ruthless competi- tion of a merit-based system of material prosperity that fails to insulate people against alienation and loneliness (Rhodes-Purdy et al. 2021). It is characterised by a realignment of identities to resonate with the common masses, often leveraging shared sentiments of disenfranchise- ment or discontent with the existing order—an order that has been created and is being led by the established elite groups (Bang and Marsh 2018; Noury and Roland 2020). Beyond mere political manoeuvring, this process also denotes a transformation in societal norms and values with far-reaching consequences. It often involves the use of symbols, narra- tives, and rhetoric that resonate with the targeted group’s identity. This can include appeals to tradition, history, and heritage, as well as the use of divisive language that emphasises differences between ‘us’ and ‘them’. The polarisation and fractiousness engendered by such identity-driven politics have led to social fragmentation, undermining the prospects for consensus and compromise. While the politics of identity remains central to this drama, the signif- icance of the role of neoliberal economics as providing its material foundations can hardly be exaggerated. The tension between the promises of neoliberalism and its potential societal repercussions is a deﬁning feature of contemporary political discourse. To begin with, neoliberalism has led to a perceived democracy deﬁcit, as it often prioritises market forces over democratic decision-making (Joppke 2023). This has created a sense of disenfranchisement among certain groups, who feel that their interests are not being represented. Neoliberal policies such as deregula- tion and limited social spending have led to increased income inequality and job insecurity among the middle class. Moreover, austerity measures

3 GEOECONOMICS, GEOPOLITICS … 43 and cutbacks in welfare programmes have created a sense of insecurity among vulnerable populations (Inglehart and Norris 2016; Rodrik 2021). Tapping into the anxieties generated by such policies, right-wing populists have blamed immigration and globalisation and have advocated for strict immigration controls and protectionist economic policies. Thus, while neoliberalism has indeed spurred economic growth in certain regions, it has simultaneously marginalised those sections of the population who perceive themselves as alienated and dispossessed. Right-wing populist leaders often exploit this discontent, presenting themselves as champions of the silent majority, promising to rectify economic imbalances and restore a sense of security through protectionist measures and nationalist policies. While populist governments are not identical to dictatorial or fascist regimes, their reliance on the leader’s will and their tendency to exclude those deemed outside the ‘good’ or ‘right’ people pushes constitutional democracy to its limits and potentially paves the way to authoritarianism. It blurs the lines that make representative democracy function and merges the notion of sovereignty with the voting majority while side-lining delib- eration and opposition (Urbinati 2019). Thus, even though populism is not anti-democratic by deﬁnition, it tends towards illiberal and authori- tarian practices. It is pertinent to note that the post-1945 world order, commonly known as the liberal international order (LIO), is actually an amalgamation of twin order building projects: the Westphalian project which gives primacy to state sovereignty and the liberal international project which encourages cooperation among states based on the values of liberal democracy, pluralism, and individual rights (Ikenberry 2011). As Robert Patman ( 2019) points out, populists worldwide “yearn for a world ruled by independent nation-states that brook no constraints on their sovereignty by multilateral institutions or international rules” ( 2019: 295). Thus, they prefer to retain only the Westphalian strand of the order building project while undermining the liberal strand. According to the detractors of the LIO, these tendencies were inherent in the policies required to uphold that very order. For instance, Mearsheimer’s scepticism about its staying power leads him to proclaim the demise of the LIO, which, according to him, was destined to fail because it contained the seeds of its own destruction. He points out three inherent ﬂaws in the LIO ( 2019: 30). First was the ambitious attempt to spread liberal democracy worldwide. This endeavour faced signiﬁ- cant obstacles, including resistance from nationalistic forces within target

44 S. CHATTERJEE AND A. KUMAR countries often resulting in conﬂicts and wars and ultimately undermining the order’s legitimacy. Second, LIO’s strong preference for interna- tional institutions and open borders clashed with the powerful forces of nationalism, which prioritise national sovereignty and identity. Promo- tion of open borders and refugee acceptance stirred tensions in a world where national identity is highly valued. Finally, the pursuit of hyper- globalisation, aimed at reducing trade barriers globally led to job losses, stagnant wages, and increased income inequality within liberal states. It also made the international ﬁnancial system less stable, causing recur- ring ﬁnancial crises. These economic challenges fuelled discontent with the liberal order and encouraged protectionist policies. These three ﬂaws, often interrelated, played a pivotal role in undermining the liberal inter- national order, contributing to political divisions, populist movements, and shifts towards nationalism in various Western democracies. Moreover, these vulnerabilities of the LIO have highlighted the difﬁculty in neatly distinguishing between trade and commerce on the one hand and national security on the other into separate registers. This entanglement of geoeco- nomics with geopolitics in contemporary times has necessitated, in some views, the retention of greater control over the market by the state for the sake of comprehensive security (Farrell and Newman 2023). The intermeshing of geopolitics and geoeconomics makes it difﬁcult to deploy ‘pure’ theoretical categories. Apparently, our account reads like a standard realist take on the international order. However, the shifts towards nationalism, proclivity to economic protectionism, and the emphasis on Westphalian sovereignty should not lead us to confuse the ‘logic of control’ with the standard realist position because unlike conventional realism, which views states as unitary actors in an anarchic international system, the ‘logic of control’ recognises the complex inter- play between domestic politics and international relations as well as the pivotal role networks and supply-chain economies play in the contem- porary order. It is an ‘intermestic’ perspective that takes into account both domestic and international factors and recognises states as active agents rather than passive responders. The rise of right-wing populist forces worldwide, for instance, is not just a reaction to global phenomena such as immigration and globalisation, but also a response to domestic issues such as income inequality, job insecurity, and welfare cutbacks.

3 GEOECONOMICS, GEOPOLITICS … 45 III All orders provide for emergency situations, some more formally than others. Since the international order is structurally decentralised but inter- meshed, institutionalisation is a major challenge. However, the longevity of the present order, in spite of the many challenges it has faced, is primarily explained by its capacity to go beyond the normal, to name existential threats and securitise domains, and, most crucially, to normalise exceptions (Schweller 2001;H u y s m a n s 2006). The third logic we propose is the ‘logic of exceptionalism’, which comes into play during extraordinary circumstances that disrupt the normal operations of order and control. These are situations that require exceptional measures, often leading to an expansion of state power and a reconﬁguration of soci- etal norms. All orders have logic of exception built into them to deal with emergencies and states leverage these emergencies to re-imagine and strengthen their sovereignty. While we use the COVID-19 pandemic as an illustrative case study for this logic, this is not limited to pandemics but applies to any crisis that disrupts the status quo and necessitates exceptional responses. As the world witnessed the COVID-19 pandemic, attention was legit- imately hijacked by epidemiologists and healthcare professionals, whose diagnosis and prognosis shaped how governments and societies responded to this crisis. As things stood, there was a wide consensus among the scientiﬁc community that social distancing and lockdown were essential as they helped disrupt the chains of contamination and thereby slowed down the rate of infection within communities. While some countries, like Vietnam, did quite well in containing the threat, most African states, and many European and Asian states struggled. Their initial carelessness in controlling the spread of the disease by easy communication proved very costly. Still others like the US also reacted late at least partly because of the government’s unwillingness to appreciate the gravity of the situa- tion owing to a variety of reasons, including business considerations and poor cognition. Despite these variations, one thing was crystal clear: the states fought the disease and seemed to be our best guarantee in this war against the contagion. Yet, the crisis was not a state-based one. In fact, as the UN Secretary- General António Guterres commented, “We are at war with a virus” and normal rules would not apply (United Nations 2020). While the idea of the human family has undergirded a part of the UN system right from its

46 S. CHATTERJEE AND A. KUMAR inception, as reﬂected in the steady work done by its many less glamorous specialised agencies and non-governmental organisations that work with it, it has never been a political lodestar in the past. This pandemic was an opportunity to test its political, as against moral, viability, though trends ultimately failed to provide very encouraging signs. There was hardly any global upscaling to this new normal. As border closing and shutdowns were hailed as effective and necessary measures to ﬁght the virus, the free movement of health workers and volunteers to various parts of the world was restricted or curbed in the interest of the containment of the threat itself (Flinders 2021). This meant that no matter how much we emphasised the global nature of the threat and the need to develop responses in keeping with it, science itself seemed to be working against the logic of standard human- itarian assistance models that are based on movement and mobilisation across frontiers. In a bizarre and paradoxical way, solidarity seemed to demand isolation rather than mixing, distance rather than connectivity, and self-discipline rather than interventionism. This seriously complicated the making of global strategies as we have traditionally understood them, their efﬁcacy or past success notwithstanding. More importantly, science had once again strengthened the cause of sovereignty at a critical hour. A cursory glance into what happened across the globe revealed that states were desperately trying to wage the war as they understood it, deploying resources available to them, in terms of political strategies and cultural representations that were thought to be relevant. Rather than the nature of the political system, the stock of social and political capital became far more important here (Sandset and Villadsen 2023). Some states found distancing and lockdown socially difﬁcult and politically costly, as the arithmetic of proﬁt got adversely affected by such moves. Others saw it easier to adopt restrictions as these societies were more dependent on their states for a wide range of services and beneﬁts. Society’s rela- tive autonomy vis-à-vis the state was therefore a good measure of the success or failings of state-dictated hard measures in two senses. First, the more we depend on the state, the easier it is for the state to bend us for our good (or bad). And the more we think like the state, the lesser the extractive cost of the state to implement difﬁcult measures that would at some point prove costly to the people. Second, science is the modern hand-maiden of sovereign politics. When science becomes the language, politics, at least in the existential sense, gets invisible. This invisibility is a priceless possession of sovereign states.

3 GEOECONOMICS, GEOPOLITICS … 47 In a nutshell, the COVID-19 pandemic afforded yet another oppor- tunity for the state to re-imagine itself and buttress sovereignty by way of performance rather than by control alone. The strengthening has happened in three ways. First, as Pratap Bhanu Mehta ( 2020) has argued, it allowed the state to improve its surveillance of the population on scien- tiﬁc grounds. No one will complain if the state wants to put in place mechanisms to track the movements of people, map their travels and stays, and ﬁnd out who they are talking to, all for their physical safety and well- being. These mechanisms deployed a wide array of technologies that are likely to stay as the threats from the COVID-19 virus may have subsided but a new pandemic may arise in time soon. If the threats remain, the deterrents are our best bets. If people think that regulations are needed for their safety and security they seldom resist. Good science told them that pandemics needed isolation. Isolation was not voluntary but required political action. Our collective action problem was overcome by the regu- latory state (Eck and Hatz 2020). We have let the state intrude on our ways and those who resisted were obscurantist who needed to be coerced. Second, the pandemic helped the state to shore up its defects and governmentality gaps. It became clear that sovereignty was the precondi- tion to effective service delivery. Its failings only called for strengthening the powers of governments for states that gave more autonomy to their society were precisely the ones that failed to save lives. As the Italian example shows, healthcare quality is not the solitary variable at play. There has to be political resolve and hard muscles in equal measures to steer them properly in the right direction. The state, therefore, got more active in binding the community closely by arguing that the lack of tightness counts heavily in crisis situations. The more close-knit as a people we are, the easier it is for the state to ﬁght enemies, be it a virus or an untrust- worthy ‘other’ (Dionne and Turkmen 2020). Sovereignty as practice is a habit of mind. The apparent performative success of a sovereign dispen- sation in treating demographics as nameless entities standardised for the effective delivery of services only nurtured that habit. Finally, the state gained by securitising the disease (Harrington 2021; Gozdecka 2021). The Secretary-General’s use of the word ‘war’, no matter his real intentions, is instructive here. Faced with an unprece- dented threat, which is claimed as the severest since World War II (again the parallel is germane), the states found it opportune to deploy the emergency mode of operation in its basic civilian functions that called for unquestioned legitimacy and full public support behind its moves.

48 S. CHATTERJEE AND A. KUMAR In any such event, if the state proves it can not only save citizens against real battles but also in wars against deadly diseases, it arrogates to itself such moral and political capital that challenging it for misdeeds and excesses would sound hollow and mischievous to even the most level-headed citizens (Greitens 2020; Huang 2021). Irrespective of the ultimate outcome of the state’s war against the virus, neither science nor humanity emerged as the winner. Žižek ( 2020) wrote that the emergency highlighted issues that had always remained with us. Issues like ‘extreme inequality, the commodiﬁed digitisation of our lives, and institutional disregard for the environment’ were brought forth in public imagination due to the normalised exceptions induced by the pandemic. It showed that the politics of life was also the politics of death—many lives had to be sacriﬁced for saving the sacrosanct ones. It also aggravated the growing gig economy of footloose labour who serve an increasingly anonymous capitalist order all over the world. Latour ( 2021) reads the crisis as a reminder of the things to come—an inevitable consequence of the much larger ecological disaster that awaits us. Both Žižek and Latour in their own ways have called for a fundamental reordering of our relations with life—be it the environment or the global economy. While these philo- sophical interventions are rich and nuanced, they miss out on the reality of the contemporary political order that is marked by the dual tensions arising out of several geopolitical and economic faultlines. Conclusion The theoretical positions on order demand discrimination of relevance and some aspects become invariably more important than others. Thus liberals ﬁnd the order to be based on capitalism, liberal democratic insti- tutions, rule of law, the idea of science and progress, and the possibility of transformation. Realists, in sharp contrast, read orders by the distribution of power and polarity. Constructivists deﬁne orders based on ideational imagination, materiality, and identity. In reality, however, systems of order are never univariate. They are innately complex and include many elements, parameters, justiﬁcations, and rules that govern relations among units. The present order is largely built on the political capital of the post-1945 period. Hence, the order remains by and large liberal, notwith- standing the deep contestations against an allegedly unequal distribution

3 GEOECONOMICS, GEOPOLITICS … 49 of privilege resulting from the same. It is broadly committed to democ- racy, free trade and exchanges, rule of law, multilateralism, incremental changes, and stability. Its overarching commitment is to the idioms of modernity predicated on the sovereignty of science and technology. This means, despite many political, social, and economic variations, states and societies remain by and large tethered to the forces of modernisation and industrialisation. While the world continues to witness the ascension of indigenous culture and traditional ways of life, along with a politics of de- globalisation and manifest rejection of liberal values, there is no apparent deviation from the material attractions of modern life. Nevertheless, the institutional architecture surrounding this order seems under a lot of stress. It is deeply contested along both strategic and economic lines. The Western alliance led by the US is in favour of retaining the status quo, although their capacity to preserve the given mili- tary balance is declining. The revisionist states are increasing in number but they do not present a united front. China, Russia, Turkey, and Iran, among others, are revisionist powers but their policies are not entirely in sync. The Russia-Ukraine War has undoubtedly brought these states together but a countervailing coalition to the US-led NATO alliance is yet to be formed. To mitigate the challenge of the revisionist states, espe- cially in the Indo-Paciﬁc, the US has entered into bilateral and minilateral strategic partnerships based on the ‘hub and spokes’ model. However, countries like India, Brazil, South Africa, and many Asia–Paciﬁc countries continue to be the classical swing states with a broad strategic portfolio that shares values with both the West and the revisionist powers (Wilkins 2022; Ciorciari and Haacke 2019). On the economic front too, there is a deep-set crisis. The after-effects of the global recession are still strong. The Chinese economic model stresses supply chains based on Chinese manufacturing and capital inﬂows that are increasingly getting contested across the world. The West theoretically remains committed to a capitalist economy but protectionism is on the rise in many parts, which is primarily linked with domestic political compulsions. The developing economies navigate the middle ground. There is no dominant narrative that unites these tendencies and the claims of equity and justice cut across the mili- tary and economic domains. Thus geoeconomics assumes signiﬁcance as liberal, open, and globalised economic policies are increasingly contested by inward, protectionist, and regionalised tendencies where the intricate networks of corporate capital are getting instrumentalised in the inter- ests of geopolitical interests. Investments and ﬁnancial instruments are

50 S. CHATTERJEE AND A. KUMAR progressively drawn into geopolitical strategies that weaponised economic capabilities for political gains. Second, the rise of right-wing populism as a response to the perceived loss of state control over borders and increased regulatory protectionism has somewhat transformed the role of the nation-state in contempo- rary times. Populist leaders leverage identity politics, using symbols and narratives to resonate with disenfranchised groups and emphasising divi- sions between ‘us’ and ‘them’. Neoliberal economics plays a signiﬁcant role here, as it prioritises market forces over democratic decision-making, contributing to income inequality and job insecurity. Populist leaders exploit these grievances, promising protectionist and nationalist policies. While not inherently anti-democratic, populism tends towards illiberal and authoritarian practices, ultimately challenging the liberal international order. Third, the COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated these trends which were already underway. The pandemic occurred alongside the long global recession that has proved to be remarkably obstinate. The regulatory state is the answer to our failure to solve problems collectively through volun- tary actions. We have continuously let the state intrude on our beneﬁt and the state has gained by securitising its survival. This has led to the democratisation of the condition of exception that normalises the use of coercion in virtually all spheres of life. We argue that the present order, like all orders, is made up of mecha- nisms of control, stability, and rules of exceptionalism. The distinctiveness of the present international order lies in its inseparable duality of geoe- conomicsand geopolitics and the unmistakable turn towards a politics of populism that poses severe challenges to the constitutive norms of the given order. Still, the time has not come yet to write the cenotaph of the liberal order. The growing pervasiveness of the logic of exceptionalism notwithstanding, the present order is predicated upon the shared norms of modernity that may ultimately withstand the recent predicament as it has weathered many crises in the past. References Adler-Nissen, R., and A. Zarakol. 2021. Struggles for recognition: The liberal international order and the merger of its discontents. International Organi- zation 75 (2): 611–634. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818320000454.

3 GEOECONOMICS, GEOPOLITICS … 51 Bajpai, K., and E.A. Laksmana. 2023. Asian conceptions of international order: What Asia wants. International Affairs 99 (4): 1371–1381. https://doi.org/ 10.1093/ia/iiad165. Bang, H., and D. Marsh. 2018. Populism: A major threat to democracy? Policy Studies 39 (3): 352–363. https://doi.org/10.1080/01442872.2018. 1475640. Bull, H. 1977. The anarchical society: A study of order in world politics. Palgrave. Ciorciari, J.D., and J. Haacke. 2019. Hedging in international relations: An introduction. International Relations of the Asia-Paciﬁc 19 (3): 367–374. https://doi.org/10.1093/irap/lcz017. Dionne, K.Y., and F.F. Turkmen. 2020. The politics of pandemic othering: Putting COVID-19 in global and historical context. International Orga- nization 74 (S1): E213–E230. https://doi.org/10.1017/S00208183200 00405. Eck, K., and S. Hatz. 2020. State surveillance and the COVID-19 crisis. Journal of Human Rights 19 (5): 603–612. https://doi.org/10.1080/14754835. 2020.1816163. Farrell, H., and Newman, A. 2023, October 19. The new economic security state. Foreign Affairs 102(6). https://www.foreignaffairs.com/united-states/ economic-security-state-farrell-newman. Flinders, M. 2021. Democracy and the Politics of Coronavirus: Trust blame and understanding. Parliamentary Affairs 74 (2): 483–502. https://doi.org/10. 1093/pa/gsaa013. Fukuyama, F. 1992. The end of history and the last man. Free Press. Gozdecka, D.A. 2021. Human rights during the pandemic: COVID-19 and securitisation of health. Nordic Journal of Human Rights 39 (3): 205–223. https://doi.org/10.1080/18918131.2021.1965367. Greitens, S.C. 2020. Surveillance, security, and liberal democracy in the post- covid World. International Organization 74 (S1): E169–E190. https://doi. org/10.1017/S0020818320000417. Harrington, J. 2021. Indicators, security and sovereignty during COVID-19 in the Global South. International Journal of Law in Context 17 (2): 249–260. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1744552321000318. Huang, Q. 2021. The pandemic and the transformation of liberal international order. Journal of Chinese Political Science 26 (1): 1–26. https://doi.org/10. 1007/s11366-020-09698-0. Huysmans, J. 2006. International politics of exception: Competing visions of international political order between law and politics. Alternatives: Global, Local, Political 31(2), 135–165. https://doi.org/10.1177/030437540603 100202. Ikenberry, G.J. 2011. Liberal Leviathan: The origins, crisis, and transformation of the American world order. Princeton University Press.

52 S. CHATTERJEE AND A. KUMAR Inglehart, R., and Norris, P . 2016. Trump, Brexit, and the Rise of populism: Economic have-nots and cultural backlash. SSRN Electronic Journal. https:// doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2818659. Joppke, C. 2023. Explaining the populist right in the neoliberal west. Societies 13 (5): 110. https://doi.org/10.3390/soc13050110. Keohane, R.O., and J.S. Nye. 1989. Power and interdependence, 2nd ed. Foresman: Scott. Klotz, A., Lynch, C., Checkel, J. T., and Dunn, K. C. 2006. Moving beyond the Agent-Structure Debate. International Studies Review, 8(2), 355–381. https://www.jstor.org/stable/3880250. Kornprobst, M., and T.V. Paul. 2021. Globalization, deglobalization and the liberal international order. International Affairs 97 (5): 1305–1316. https:// doi.org/10.1093/ia/iiab120. Lake, D.A., L.L. Martin, and T. Risse. 2021. Challenges to the Liberal Order: Reﬂections on international organization. International Organization 75 (2): 225–257. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818320000636. Lascurettes, K. M., and Poznansky, M. 2021. International order in theory and practice. In Oxford research encyclopedia of international studies, ed. K. M. Lascurettes and M. Poznansky. Oxford University Press. https://doi.org/10. 1093/acrefore/9780190846626.013.673. Latour, B. 2021. After lockdown: A metamorphosis. Polity Press. Mearsheimer, J.J. 1994. The false promise of international institutions. Interna- tional Security 19 (3): 5. https://doi.org/10.2307/2539078. Mearsheimer, J.J. 2019. Bound to fail: The rise and fall of the liberal international order. International Security 43 (4): 7–50. https://doi.org/10.1162/isec_a_ 00342. Mehta, P . B. 2020, October 4. History after covid-19: The making of a new global order.O p e n . https://openthemagazine.com/cover-story/history-after-covid- 19-the-making-of-a-new-global-order/. Noury, A., and G. Roland. 2020. Identity politics and populism in Europe. Annual Review of Political Science 23 (1): 421–439. https://doi.org/10. 1146/annurev-polisci-050718-033542. Patman, R. G. 2019. The liberal international order and its populist adver- saries in Russia, UK and USA. In Populism and world politics, ed. Stengel, F.A., MacDonald, D.B., and Nabers, D., 277–303. Springer International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-04621-7_11. Rhodes-Purdy, M., R. Navarre, and S.M. Utych. 2021. Populist psychology: Economics, culture, and emotions. The Journal of Politics 83 (4): 1559–1572. https://doi.org/10.1086/715168. Rodrik, D. 2021. Why does globalization fuel populism? Economics, culture, and the rise of right-wing populism. Annual Review of Economics 13 (1): 133–170. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-economics-070220-032416.

3 GEOECONOMICS, GEOPOLITICS … 53 Roth, M.S. 1985. A problem of recognition: Alexandre Kojeve and the end of history. History and Theory 24 (3): 293. https://doi.org/10.2307/2505171. Sandset, T., and K. Villadsen. 2023. Pandemic modelling and model citizens: Governing COVID-19 through predictive models, sovereignty and discipline. The Sociological Review 71 (3): 624–641. https://doi.org/10.1177/003802 61221102023. Schweller, R. L. 2001. The problem of international order revisited: A review essay. International Security 26(1), 161–186. https://www.jstor.org/stable/ 3092081. Slaughter, A.-M. 2004. A new world order. Princeton University Press. Tönnies, F., and J. Harris. 2001. Community and civil society. Cambridge University Press. United Nations. 2020, March 19. Secretary-General virtual press encounter on COVID-19 CRISIS. https://www.un.org/sg/en/content/sg/press-encoun ter/2020-03-19/secretary-general-virtual-press-encounter-covid-19-crisis. Urbinati, N. 2019. Me the people: How populism transforms democracy.H a r v a r d University Press. Vuorelma, J. 2020. From identiﬁcation to division: Contesting the unity of the west from within. In Contestations of liberal order, ed. Lehti, M.,Pennanen, H.-R., and Jouhki, J., 99–121. Springer International Publishing. https:// doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-22059-4_4. Waltz, K. N. 1979. Theory of international politics. Addison-Wesley Pub. Co. Wendt, A.E. 1987. The agent-structure problem in international relations theory. International Organization 41 (3): 335–370. https://doi.org/10.1017/S00 2081830002751X. Wilkins, T. 2022. A hub-and-spokes, “Plus” model of us alliances in the Indo- Paciﬁc: Towards a new “Networked” design. Asian Affairs 53 (3): 457–480. https://doi.org/10.1080/03068374.2022.2090767. Žižek, S. 2020. Pandemic! COVID-19 shakes the world. Polity Press.

CHAPTER 4 In Search of Global South Liberalism: Prospects and Challenges Gazala Fareedi The dichotomy between security issues on the one hand and economic issues on the other in the study of international politics is increasingly becoming blurred in contemporary times. Traditionally security issues were considered to be in the realm of ‘high-politics’ and socio-economic- cultural issues in the domain of ‘low-politics’. However, this evolving complex relationship between international security and international economy seems to be taking on new dynamics in the contemporary global landscape. This phenomenon is demonstrated by the term ‘geoeconomics’ which refers to the use of economic means to achieve political ends which may also be security related. Economic sanctions, trade restrictions, devel- opment aid, investments and other economic carrot and stick policies may be used to coerce states into compliance with political and security-related G. Fareedi (B) Southﬁeld College, University of North Bengal, Darjeeling, India e-mail: gazalafareedi@gmail.com © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapor e Pte Ltd. 2024 O. Mishra and S. Sen (eds.), Global Political Economy, Geopolitics and International Security , https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-97-2231-0_4 55

56 G. FAREEDI demands. The greater the interdependence, especially asymmetrical inter- dependence, the more states become willing to use and make other states vulnerable to the use of such geoeconomic tactics. The term ‘geoeconomics’ was used by Edward Luttwak in an article published in 1990 titled, ‘From Geopolitics to Geoeconomics: Logic of Conﬂict, Grammar of Commerce’. In the context of the post-cold war international system, he argued that “the methods of commerce are displacing military methods- with disposable capital in lieu of ﬁre- power, civilian innovation in lieu of military-technical advancement, and market penetration in lieu of garrisons and bases” (Luttwak 1990: 17). The emphasis was on the point that “economic regulation is as much a tool of statecraft as military defences ever were” and that the logic of war and conﬂict is increasingly being played out through the grammar of commerce (Luttwak 1990:18). According to him, although “under whatever name, ‘geoeconomics’ has always been an important aspect of international life”, in the past, strategic priorities always over-shadowed commercial priorities. However, in the post-cold war period, there has been a “devaluation of military strength as an instrument of statecraft in the direct relations of the greatest powers” (Luttwak 1990: 20–21). This further leads to a scenario where both the causes and instruments of war are increasingly going to be economic in nature (Luttwak 1990: 21). Following the popularisation of the term since the publication of this article, contemporary scholars have argued that there has been a shift from geopolitics to geoeconomics in international politics. Sören Scholvin and Mikael Wigell have argued that “States increasingly practice power politics by economic means”. Hence the Western countries increasingly favour negative geoeconomic policies like economic sanctions to deal with cases like Iran’s nuclear weapons programme or the Russian annexation of Crimea. Other emerging powers like China, Brazil and South Africa use positive geoeconomic tools such as investments to build inﬂuence and garner alliances. Through alliances such as the BRICS, there is an effort to soft balance the Western powers economically (Scholvin and Wigell 2019:1–2). Blackwill and Harris have written that “Russia, China and others now routinely look to geoeconomics means, often as a ﬁrst resort, and often to undermine American power and inﬂuence” while America has increasingly forgotten the use of this traditional method (Blackwill and Harris 2017: 1). Starting with the Johnson and Nixon administration, the use of geoeconomic tools had lessened in the overall American foreign

4 IN SEARCH OF GLOBAL SOUTH LIBERALISM: PROSPECTS … 57 policy, making America more prone to using military means (Blackwill and Harris 2017: 3). In the 1990s, American policymakers became scep- tical of using geoeconomic tools to strengthen American power due to many factors. First, since the ‘unipolar moment’ lacked any serious chal- lengers to the system, economic liberalism prevailed. Second, American economists strictly adhered to the separation of positive sum realm of economy and negative sum realm of power politics (Mandelbaum 2014: 6). During this period, America’s hegemony prevailed over both the spheres of geopolitics and geoeconomics (Baracuhy 2019: 18). However, as has been argued by Braz Baracuhy, with the start of the new millen- nium, a noticeable shift occurred in the global landscape, revealing a distinct separation in the distribution of economic and political inﬂu- ence. This led to the detachment of geoeconomics from geopolitics. A multipolar economic framework emerged, encompassing innovation, investment, production, trade and, notably, economic growth. The tradi- tional centres of economic power and signiﬁcant geoeconomic players, such as France, Germany, Great Britain, Japan and the United States, now existed alongside emerging centres of economic inﬂuence, including Brazil, China and India, which have become increasingly active in the realm of geoeconomics (Baracuhy 2019: 18). Hence, an increasing number of nations are engaging in geopolitics using various economic instruments to pursue goals that were tradi- tionally associated with military pressure or conquest. These include not only great powers like Russia and China, but also the Gulf States and others (Blackwill and Harris 2017: 4–5). The major shift that has taken place is that this new application of geoeconomics by other coun- tries is without any hesitation with regard to the preservation of the global liberal economic order which US foreign policy protected and promoted during its heyday. Blackwill and Harris argue that rising powers “pledge no particular allegiance to these same liberal economic under- standings, do not take any such disciplinary divides between geo-politics and economics in their own policy making, and are thoroughly comfort- able with harnessing economic tools to work their strategic will in the world” (Blackwill and Harris 2017:7).

58 G. FAREEDI Challenges to Complex Interdependence The theory and practice of geoeconomics therefore raises a fundamental challenge to the theory and practice of liberalism in international politics, which broadly argues that interdependence and trade among states may lead to further cooperation and reduce the chances of conﬂict. Concep- tually, ‘geoeconomics’ aligns itself to the realist theory of international politics (Blackwill and Harris 2017: 9) which explains state behaviour on the basis of concepts like survival, self-help, statism, zero sum game and competition for relative power. Geoeconomics has highlighted the limi- tations of the liberal economic and political order. With the increasing economic interdependence among states and various other non-state actors, the risks and vulnerabilities are also on the rise. Henry Farrell and Abraham L Newman have outlined “how states increasingly ‘weaponize interdependence’ by leveraging global networks of informational and ﬁnancial exchange for strategic advantage” (Farrell and Newman 2019: 42–79). They argue that instead of a decentralised version of complex interdependence taking place globally, there has emerged an unequal ‘hub and spoke’ version of interdependence where power is magniﬁed in the central nodes. Focusing on international ﬁnancial system and global internet communications, they argue that the central nodes for both these systems lie predominantly within the advanced industrial countries like the United States and United Kingdom. These systems can be weaponised by these countries through two methods: ‘panopticon’ and ‘chokepoint effects of networks’ (Farrell and Newman 2019: 42–79). They argue that, “In the former, advantaged states [having territorial and legal jurisdiction over network hubs] use their network position to extract informational advantages vis-à-vis adversaries, whereas in the latter, they can cut adver- saries off from network ﬂows” (Farrell and Newman 2019:42–79). From the ‘weaponization of interdependence’, Mark Galeotti has moved a step further and argued that contemporarily the world is going through ‘the weaponisation of everything’ and we live in a state of permanent crisis or permacrisis (Galeotti 2021). He argues that although traditional warfare as in the twentieth century still exists, such a kind of warfare has become rarer as it has become both socially (body bags) and economically expen- sive. Warfare has therefore gone on to be fought in other realms of economy, politics, legality and culture, which he titles twenty-ﬁrst century warfare. According to Galeotti, “What is more, these conﬂicts are often not only distant but covert, and as a result undeclared, unacknowledged,

4 IN SEARCH OF GLOBAL SOUTH LIBERALISM: PROSPECTS … 59 even unrecognized…[creating] a potential world of permanent, subli- mated conﬂict, of the political struggle of all against all” (Galeotti 2021: 209). However, what needs to be underlined is that conﬂict and war in different forms have always existed in human life. As Andrew Linklater has mentioned, “No such exercise in political imagination can ignore Freud’s safe prediction that societies may never reach the point where they no longer need to guard against those who will seize any opportunity to exploit the vulnerable and to inﬂict harm in other ways” (Linklater 2011: 2). This does not however preclude the striving for establishing a collec- tive understanding of the manner in which conﬂict can be reduced and cooperation might be broadened and deepened globally. Linklater has further emphasised that in contrast to predatory animals, humans have the capacity for cultural development, allowing them to structure their interactions in a way that restrains aggressive tendencies and manages the ability to cause harm (Linklater 2011: 3). Even though the terms geoe- conomics, weaponised interdependence, hybrid warfare and permacrisis have come to re-organise the international security and political dynamics, different versions of the same Machiavellian strategies have always been at play throughout human life. This does not in any manner undermine human beings’ capacity for cooperation and progress. Use of Geoeconomics and Nature of Permacrisis The use of geoeconomics, even though not under its present nomen- clature, has always existed in human interactions. In fact, in the under- standing of power, one can say that ‘A’ has power over ‘B’ if ‘A’ can make ‘B’ do what it wants it to do (Menon 2008: 148). This can be done by ‘A’ in three ways: ﬁrst, by the threat of physical retaliation if disobeyed (use of force/military use/traditional warfare/stick policy); second by giving or withdrawing certain inducements (carrot policy/ giving-taking away of economic beneﬁt/other incentives); and third by soft power where ‘B’ will automatically do what ‘A’ wants it to do due to its afﬁnity with ‘A’. Here, geoeconomics comes under the second category of the way in which power is exercised. With regard to inter- national politics, if push comes to shove, states have a proclivity to use all three versions of power in their interactions with other states. Braz Baracuhy has argued that “geoeconomics and geo-politics should be seen together under the framework of geostrategy” (Baracuhy 2019: 14).

60 G. FAREEDI According to him, “Geoeconomics and geo-politics are distinct yet related and complementary types of geostrategy” (Baracuhy 2019:18). Amer- ican geostrategy in East Asia under the Obama administration included both the concepts of geopolitics and geoeconomics. Although the United States under the Trump administration withdrew from the TPP (Trans- Paciﬁc Partnership), but this was the geoeconomic aspect to complement and supplement the ‘Pivot to Asia’ geopolitical strategy. This was done in order to overall balance the rise of China in the region (Baracuhy 2019: 15). With regard to the timeline, although the term came into prominence only after the 1990s, Baracuhy has outlined that America’s containment strategy after the end of the Second World War included both geopolitical and geoeconomic aspects, with the formation of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization as the former aspect and the Marshall Plan as the latter aspect of the strategy (Baracuhy 2019: 21). What also needs to be underlined is that geoeconomics as a strategy has a greater probability to be used by those countries with a greater economic capacity. It cannot be used by most of the developing coun- tries in the Global South, especially smaller countries like small island states. ‘Global South’ is itself not a homogenous category and there are great variations within the category itself. However, most of the coun- tries within this category would still be categorised under the zone of developing economies. Hence it can be said that there is a greater proba- bility that these countries will be at the receiving end of the geoeconomic policies of the economically stronger industrialised developed countries. Also, it needs to be highlighted that the nature of the permacrisis for these countries might be of a very different kind than other countries. With regard to permacrisis, Mark Galeotti outlined a scenario of a war of everyone against everyone with mixed methods of attack and subversion through “Hybrid War. Grey Zone Warfare. Asymmetric War. Tolerance Warfare. Unrestricted War. Non-Linear Warfare” (Galeotti 2022:9 ) . All such overt and covert tactics requires an attacker/conspirator and a victim/attacked. However, for the many economically weaker and geographically smaller island states, the permacrisis is in the form of either abject poverty and extremely low human development index among its population, or existential crisis in the form of severe climate change impacts like submergence of entire territories under water due to the rise in the sea levels. These latter challenges do not require an active conspir- atorial enemy tactics behind the scenes planning subversion through various traditional and non-traditional means. The security concerns of

4 IN SEARCH OF GLOBAL SOUTH LIBERALISM: PROSPECTS … 61 the island states are non-traditional in nature, like climate change, unreg- ulated ﬁshing, pollution and oil spills. This is in stark contrast to the traditional security threats of the bigger countries. For example, one of the major concerns for United States, India and Australia is regarding the increasing strategic use of economic power by China (Baruah 2022). In order to send a message to the world, Maldives had in 2009 held a cabinet meeting underwater. Since rising sea levels can submerge the archipelago, Maldives literally faces a complete territorial existential threat (Maryam 2009). Highlighting the same issue in the ‘Oceans Nations: An Indo Paciﬁc Islands Dialogue Forum’ held in 2021, Ahmed Khaleel, minister of state for foreign affairs of Maldives, said, “For a lot of other countries, the threats [such as IUU ﬁshing and climate change] are on the margins. But for a country like the Maldives, its life or death itself” (Baruah 2022). Reforming Multilateralism This does not mean that island nation states cannot be subjected to or are free from the dangers of traditional military security threats and geoe- conomic strategies or a mix of both. That threat is always looming large over all sovereign states. However, both in the context of global problems like climate change which require global solutions and in the context of traditional military security threats, one of the solutions is multilateralism. In fact, for many developing countries which are not only geographically small but also militarily and economically weak, multilateral platforms play a very important role in both international political and economic governance. While the importance of the United Nations can be debated for developed countries, the same cannot be purported for developing/ underdeveloped countries. Not only does the United Nations give all countries an equal footing in the General Assembly, but it provides a very important platform to voice their concerns internationally. Perma- nent Representative and Ambassador to the UN for Fiji Satyendra Prasad points out: “We look to multilateralism for global governance….and we look to the multilateral system to provide us with the rules through which we negotiate and mediate our interests and protect our interest in global systems” (Baruah 2022). Based on the premises of the realist theory of international politics, the role of international organisations, regional organisations and non- governmental organisations come under scepticism. Apart from giving

62 G. FAREEDI international organisations an unimportant secondary role, it is even argued that such organisations are only a tool in the hands of the powerful countries. During the deadly corona virus pandemic, another specialised agency of the UN, the WHO (World Health Organization), came under heavy criticism. It was pointed out that the “talk of the town is that the state has become the sole provider of security and stability and that glob- alization is in retreat” (Fareedi 2020). But what needs to be realised is that states are worse off dealing with such global problems alone. The pandemic “has truly questioned the limiting theories of global politics which posit self-regarding/egoistic behaviour by states as the only natural behavior” (Fareedi 2020). In such crisis situations, the question is not one of whether or not states are willing to cooperate but rather what would be the catastrophic consequences of non-cooperation. This is not only true for problems in the non-traditional realm like climate change but also traditional problems like nuclear weapons and nuclear energy uses. The same can be held right for protection against emerging geoeconomic tactics. In fact, Galeotti who has outlined the concept of ‘the weaponisation of everything’ and a dismal international scenario of permacrisis has written that, “[I]t may appear that there is no place for international institutions such as the UN, for example, but arguably the opposite is true. It is, rather, that the focus needs to shift away from a concentration on ‘big war’ and towards setting and enforcing the new ‘etiquette’ of international rela- tions. Established international organizations of global governance like the International Court of Justice, Interpol, the World Health Organisation, International telecommunication Union and others will have to enhance their capabilities to address the emerging challenges. They need to be strengthened and broadened to play a more positive and constructive role in world affairs (Galeotti 2021: 210-212). The explicit need for the continued presence and play of varied insti- tutions of the international order has to be re-enforced with the need to reform these institutions to make these more democratic and equal. The power of the developed countries that underlined the establishment of these institutions has manifested itself in reserving a special place for themselves, whether it be regarding the membership and the veto power of the permanent ﬁve members of the Security Council or the voting powers in the International Monetary Fund, among others. One of the

4 IN SEARCH OF GLOBAL SOUTH LIBERALISM: PROSPECTS … 63 efforts towards establishing a more equitable multilateralism was made through the South-South Cooperation. The origins of this cooperation go back to the historic Asian-African Conference held in Bandung in 1955, where “the newly decolonized countries of the global south emphasized economic and cultural cooperation, human rights and the promotion of world peace” (Gray and Gills 2016: 558). This further went on to become a precursor to the formation of the Non-Aligned Movement. This became the political dimension of the South-South Cooperation. The economic dimension was put forward by the formation of the Group of 77 and the UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on Trade and Development) which called for the formation of the NIEO (New Inter- national Economic Order) in 1974 to end the economic domination of the Global North on the Global South. Unfortunately, by the 1980s with the rising debt crisis of the Global South countries coupled with the strict resistance by the Global North, the NIEO project could not take off. However, with the changing global scenario, Kevin Gray and Barry K. have argued that “There is a widespread sense today, however, that the time is ripe for moving SSC once again onto the centre stage of world politics and economics, and a renewed interest in its historic promise to transform world order” (Gray and Gills 2016: 558). Here, they focus on the role of India, Brazil, South Africa Dialogue Forum (2003) and BRICS (2001 and 2010) and their role in the construction of an alternative to the hegemonic and neo-colonial politics of the Global North. Whether the South-South Cooperation will be able to attain the objec- tives of promoting a more equitable economic and political world order is a question whose answer is surrounded by a lot of debates. The impor- tant principle is the maintenance of a rules-based international order where countries refrain from advancing short-term geoeconomic tools for protecting the rules-based system. The system or rules of the game might have been tilted towards powerful, but the larger objective is not to do away with the rules altogether but to reform them. Considering that the Global South is not a homogenous category, question arises as to the varied intentions and approaches of these countries as well. There are scholars who are of the view that the elite and the powerful countries in the Global South like China, India and Brazil will just go on to repro- duce the same unequal structures. On the other hand, there are scholars who are more hopeful about cooperation and its potential to transform the world. But the context has deﬁnitely changed. In contrast to earlier

64 G. FAREEDI times, when no countries from the Global South had the economic poten- tial, the renewed demands for restructuring of the unequal global trade and international organisations are taking place in a different context. Here the bargaining power of the Global South has increased with the rise of the economic potential of some of its countries. As Gray and Gills have argued, this “has led them to acquire the capacity for greater and more sustained economic cooperation with developing countries” (Gray and Gills 2016: 570). Secondly, instead of rejecting the already existing institutions of global trade which are dominated by the countries of the Global North, developing countries have taken an active part in them. For example, the WTO might have its problems, but developing countries are still a part of it, because not to be so would call for global trade marginal- isation (Gray and Gills 2016: 560). At the same time, they also highlight that now countries have got a new alternative with regard to loans espe- cially with the setting up of the BRICS Bank—New Development Bank in 2015. Hence emerging developing countries have now taken on the role of becoming signiﬁcant donors as well (Gray and Gills 2016: 562). Blackwill and Harris have argued that newly emerging countries, especially China, have no regard towards maintaining the global liberal economic order that the United States has preserved since establishment. Hence these new countries are more prone to using geoeconomic tactics in a ruthless manner (Blackwill and Harris 2017: 7). The same is reit- erated by the terms ‘debt trap’ and ‘rogue donor’. However, Gray and Gills have argued that, “while the ideologies deployed may be different from those of the West, both use political rhetoric to conceal their own interests. At the same time, as with the interventions of rising powers in other ﬁelds of SSC, there remain key questions as to whether emerging donors are capable of challenging the dominant conditionality-driven aid architecture, and whether a new aid paradigm can be established that moves beyond the pursuit of the national interest and focuses on the developmental needs of recipients” (Gray and Gills 2016: 563). However, with these changes and new structures in place, at least the recipient countries have a choice as to which institution would better serve their interests. They have been able to loosen their complete dependence on the countries of the Global North.

4 IN SEARCH OF GLOBAL SOUTH LIBERALISM: PROSPECTS … 65 Global South Liberalism An equitable form of multilateralism is one of the most important pillars on which to promote a system in which countries look towards maintaining long-term rules-based order instead of using geoeconomic strategies which can only be beneﬁcial in the short term. Multilateral forums can be used by various groupings, especially of the weaker states to strengthen fair and sustainable trade, economy, polity and justice. Economic expansionism has to be balanced with sustainable development, environmental protection and for maintaining basic human rights and welfare of the people. Narratives play a very important role in politics in general, whether domestic or international. Theories are one of the most important ways on which narratives are based. Policies, both domestic and international, are cocooned within the dominant narratives. The narra- tive of permacrisis globally can set the stage for extreme measures to be taken by the state actors. It might even lead to the rise of authoritar- ianism in states as leaders would justify the centralisation of powers to deal with emergency situations, thereby leading to a democratic back- sliding in many countries. In this context, Ole Waever has emphasised the dangers of securitisation of everything. He writes, “…addressing an issue in security terms still evokes an image of threat-defense, allocating to the state an important role in addressing it. This is not always an improve- ment” (Weaver 2007: 66). Securitisation essentially includes increasing the role of state negatively which can be very dangerous for individual rights and freedom. The state might even justify spying on its own citi- zens and setting up a panopticon like system for purposes of maintenance of security and stability. This narrative of permacrisis is well intentioned but it might lead to unintended negative consequences. One of the ways in which the narrative of the permacrisis, ‘weapon- isation of everything’ and ‘weaponisation of interdependence’ can be balanced and approached dialectically, is by posing it along with the narra- tive of the liberal international order. Since the liberal international order has come to be viewed in terms of domination by the West on the rest, there is a need for it to be reclaimed and remodelled. In this context, J. Luis Rodriguez and Christy Thorton have argued that most accounts of liberalism in the Global South follow either two trajectories: one is expansionism of the liberal project from the West to the rest where the Global North is essentially the rule maker and the Global South is merely the rule takers. The other trajectory is that of the critical approaches

66 G. FAREEDI which underline the West’s imperial project as the bedrock of the liberal order. However, Rodriguez and Thorton, based on case studies from Latin America, have instead argued that Global South countries have not been merely rule/norm takers in the whole liberal international order project. It has been pointed out that “They [Latin American states] have insisted that the rules of a rules-based order should apply not just to the poor, weak or indebted but to the rich, strong, and powerful as well” (Rodriguez and Christy 2022: 627). They further argue that instead of merely being rule takers, leaders and diplomats from Latin America have actively involved themselves in international processes that have gone on to shape the varied contours of the Liberal International Order (LIO) . More importantly these processes continue even today and should not be ignored by the political and mainstream academic discourse surrounding the LIO (Rodriguez and Christy 2022: 627). There needs to be a de- linking of the Liberal International Order and the West/Global North as countries from the Global South have been as much a part of this order as any other country. They also point out that it might be assumed that many countries of the Global South having been at the receiving end of the spectrum of great power economic and political processes and would have refused the liberal international order but they have repeatedly sought to reform and even strengthen the institutions that have governed that order over time” (Rodriguez and Christy 2022: 627). Even the discourse surrounding the rising powers, which have beneﬁted from the liberal order both economically and politically, focuses on their resistance against this order. Based on the realist notions of balance of power, “…scholars argue that rising powers might attempt to build a new order- even through war- if the order does not adapt to accommodate their demands” (Rodriguez and Christy 2022: 630). However, the reality is quite different especially based on the study of countries from Latin America. “Latin America was the region where the United States ﬁrst experimented with the practices and policies of hegemony.... It is precisely because of their familiarity with the vicissitudes of hegemonic behaviour, however, that Latin Americans have advocated for institutions and frameworks in the international order that can address problems collectively and can counter domination by constraining the unilateral prerogatives of great powers… Thus, Latin America offers examples of how Global South actors might seek to modify some aspects of the international order while defending

4 IN SEARCH OF GLOBAL SOUTH LIBERALISM: PROSPECTS … 67 others that might beneﬁt similar countries” (Rodriguez and Christy 2022: 630). Role of new international and inter-governmental organisations is vital in this context. The recent enlargement of the BRICS with the addition of the six new members in the Johannesburg Summit in August 2023 goes on to show the possibility of reclaiming and remodelling the international order. Although BRICS might have its own share of problems, but it has remained steadfast for 15 years and is increasingly playing greater role in economic governance with the BRICS New Development Bank. This is a modest beginning, but a beginning to provide an alternative nonethe- less. Similarly, from the perspective of India, it is a rising power and it has consistently tried to shape the Liberal International Order through various means, especially with its active role in United Nations and its many organs. Conclusion Interdependence is being weaponised but the protection lies in coopera- tion itself. Countries have to move towards more partnerships, alliances and groups to solve not only global problems like climate change but also to protect themselves against such negative geoeconomic strategies. This is true not only for economically weaker countries but also the rising powers that have a stake in preserving the rules-based order that has led to their rise in the ﬁrst place. Hence the countries from the Global South need to be actively preserving this order. The fact that these rising powers are in a position to use geoeconomic strategies in the ﬁrst instance is because their economies have strengthened by being an active part of the liberal order in the ﬁrst place. This order as of now has its prob- lems and needs reform and remodelling, but it also needs reclaiming as well to make it more equal and sustainable. Also, a re-deﬁnition does not mean that its core principles and foundations are being challenged. The new reformed system needs to be built on the same positive rules- based foundations. Longer-term interests of preserving and claiming a reformed version of this order should be prioritised over geoeconomic strategies that would be more beneﬁcial only in the short term. There is no denying that global institutions need reform and restructuring so that more countries can have an equal power in the decision-making bodies. At the same time, we need to know that the future of the world lies

68 G. FAREEDI in a rules-based order strengthened by global institutions that promote values such as the human rights and liberal democracy. These values need continuous protection and promotion both in the domestic sphere and in the international arena. References Baruah, M. D. 2022. What Island nations have to say on Indo-Paciﬁc geopoli- tics. Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, March, https://carnegiee ndowment.org/2022/03/23/what-island-nations-have-to-say-on-indo-pac iﬁc-geopolitics-pub-86700#:~:text=Acknowledging%20this%20discrepancy% 2C%20Ahmed%20Khaleel,it%27s%20life%20or%20death%20itself. Blackwill, R. D., and Harris, J. M. 2017. War by Other Means: Geoeconomics and Statecraft. Harvard University Press. Braz, B. 2019. Geoeconomics as a dimension of grand strategy. In Geoeconomics and power politics in the 21st century, ed. M. Wigell, S. Sholvin, and M. Aaltola, 14–28. Routledge. Fareedi, G. 2020, May 6. Challenges to the Realist perspective during the coronavirus pandemic. E-International Relations. https://www.e-ir.info/ 2020/05/06/opinion-challenges-to-the-realist-perspective-during-the-cor onavirus-pandemic/. Farrell, H., and A.L. Newman. 2019. Weaponized interdependence: How Global economic networks shape state coercion. International Security 44 (1): 42– 79. Galeotti, M. 2022. The weaponisation of everything. Yale University Press. Kevin, G., and B.K. Gills. 2016. South-South cooperation and the rise of the Global South. Third World Quarterly 37 (4): 557–574. Linklater, A. 2011. The problem of harm in world politics. Cambridge University Press. Luis, R.J., and Thorton, C. 2022. The liberal international order and the global south: A view from Latin America. Cambridge Review of International Affairs 35(5). Luttwak. E. N. 1990. From geopolitics to geoeconomics: Logic of conﬂict, grammar of commerce. The National Interest, 17–23. Menon, N. 2008. Power. In Political theory, ed. Bhargava, R., and Acharya, A. Pearson Longman. Omidi, M. 2009, October 19. Maldives send climate SOS with undersea cabinet. Reuters. https://www.reuters.com/article/idUSTRE59G0P1/. Scholvin, S., and M. Wigell. 2019. Geoeconomic power politics-introduction. In Geoeconomics and power politics in the 21st century, ed. M. Wigell, S. Sholvin, and M. Aaltola, 1–14. Routledge. Waever, O. 2007. Securitization and desecuritization. In International Security V olume III, ed. Buzan, B., and Hansen, L. Sage.

CHAPTER 5 Resources, Economic Prosperity and International Conﬂicts Saibal Kar The expectation of a large-scale war in Europe was not part of the economic recovery plan that the world has been dealing with for the past two years. The war on pandemic has lasted for more than two years, and with occasional recurrences in pockets globally, the economic recovery has at best been slow and rocked by negative expectations of growth in most of the countries. Since one of the pillars of the modern theories of economic growth highlights the importance of population growth, contrary to common wisdom regarding the negative impact it bestows on economies, the considerable loss of lives lowers growth expectations. However, around the same time that the number of people affected by the virus started receding across countries of Europe, United States and Asia, parts of the world broke into war. The timing of the war in East Europe has stretched the recovery from the COVID-19-related health and economic shocks. In most analyses S. Kar (B) Centre for Studies in Social Sciences Calcutta, Kolkata, India e-mail: saibal@cssscal.org © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapor e Pte Ltd. 2024 O. Mishra and S. Sen (eds.), Global Political Economy, Geopolitics and International Security , https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-97-2231-0_5 69

70 S. KAR where the shock from the pandemic translates into economic shocks, the path of recovery has been mostly a ﬂat U-shaped curve. It implies that while the fall has been rapid and almost instantaneous given the exigency of the circumstances, the revival has been slow. A number of conﬂicts around the world concomitantly with this recovery process have slowed it down even further. While wars are hardly uncommon and the break-out of wars has no discernible patterns, the present episodes added another dimension not recently observed. The Russian invasion of Ukraine has been the ﬁrst of its kind on any European country since the end of World War II. Apart from the reluctance of Russia to accept the status of Ukraine as an independent nation, the unspoken agenda (Muggah and Dryganov 2022) has been to access the extraordinary resource base in Ukraine, including some of the largest energy, mineral and agricultural assets in the world. Compared to this, the political justiﬁcation that Russia wishes to de-militarise and denazify Ukraine stands on a fairly weak ground as a geopolitical strategy compared to the underlying economic objectives arising from signiﬁcant internal resource depletion that preceded the war episode. Since there has not been any remarkable recent event relating resource depletion to war efforts by one or more countries, the closest association might have been that between World War I and the Great Inﬂuenza epidemic (1918–1920) one hundred years back. However, in terms of the time sequence, World War I led and brieﬂy coexisted with the million deaths from ﬂu globally. Indeed, not long thereafter the great economic recession followed and arguably might have paved the way for the World War II. However, this study is not to determine the lead-lag relation between resource depletion and global wars, but an exploratory effort in understanding the political and economic conditions that inﬂu- ence choice regarding war. The conditions discussed in this chapter shall be the basis for estimating how the regimes of democratic peace are concomittantly inﬂuenced by internal and external crises. Notably, before we discuss resources and conditions of war it is useful to remember that in a strongly interconnected world order the economic impact of war shall be quick to percolate across borders through various channels. In recent times, the contagion of crises whether generated by a ﬁnancial meltdown or a physical war seems to take two main routes for affecting other countries—international trade, and ﬁnancial ﬂows. Indeed, contagion often leads to long episodes of geopolitical crisis in the world economy. There are obviously many more factors that determine the initiation and duration of large-scale wars than we can presently cover.

5 RESOURCES, ECONOMIC PROSPERITY … 71 In Sect. 2, we discuss the channels through which conﬂicts affect the economic outcomes. Section 3 offers a brief discussion on how the country groups appear in connection with military expenditure and economic growth. We also show the relation between economic growth and growth of mineral rent for these groups of countries. Section 4 concludes. Conflicts and Economic Outcomes Trade Links When countries are in isolation and do not engage in international trade, the movement of goods and services does not transmit shocks across borders. It is important to note that over the last ﬁve decades, the share of global trade in the global gross domestic product (GDP) has grown from 24.9% in the year 1970, 37.13% in 1980, 37.6% in 1990, 50.7% in 2000 to 56.54% in 2020. 1 Of these, China alone has grown from a meagre 8% in 1970 to 64% in 2006, and falling back to 37% in 2021 in terms of their trade share as percentage of gross domestic product. India too has a trade share out of GDP at 45% as of 2021. These numbers are suggestive of the fact that economic crises whether caused by a pandemic or conﬂict between countries shall affect many countries that engage in such high intensity of international trade in goods and services. While the pandemic with considerable loss of life kept the workforce away from production, a physical conﬂict damages and disrupts several such units requiring reconstruction and large investments over time. This naturally leads to breaks in the supply chain within and across coun- tries. One of the priority imports the world over is oil and natural gas that most countries in Europe and Asia are not adequately endowed with. The ensuing war in east Europe brought steep conditions regarding export and import of natural gas by majority of the European coun- tries that depend on Russia’s reserve. It also brings in a serious political challenge for the importing country, because through multilateral refer- endums many of these countries chose to put economic and other types of sanctions in place. In the event of complete trade sanctions, these countries must ﬁnd alternative sources of energy and fuel. This not only 1 Data source: World Bank, Washington DC and OECD, Paris.

72 S. KAR involves large investments, but is unlikely to be available for full service at a short notice. The need for resources could lead to more conﬂicts. Owing to the ongoing war, Ukraine shall export less despite being a large exporter of iron and steel, animal and vegetable oil including sunﬂower seeds and oil, electrical equipment, railway parts, ores and minerals, etc., to the rest of the world. According to the data from UN Commodity Trade Statistics database, of the 96 commodities that have positive share in Ukraine’s trade basket the country has compara- tive advantage in 24 commodities, and it is specialised in the export of cereals. Ukraine exports more than 27 times its ‘fair share’ of cereals as compared to trading nations of equivalent size. Consequently, if war disrupts the supply of basic items like cereals, it leads to inﬂationary pressure for core consumables. Overall, a large number of countries get affected by the cross-border conﬂict via these trade links. For example, like most other countries in the world, Ukraine has strong trade relations with China. In terms of magnitude, in the year 2020 Ukraine exported US$7.1bn worth of goods to China, which is accounted as 14.5% of Ukraine’s total exports. It is also well documented that Russia exports by several times more (US$49.1bn) to China and therefore trade ties often lead to political alignments. However, after the onset and prolonging of conﬂicts, the trade volume is expected to decline and this may engender further need to access resources beyond borders. While this proposition may often be difﬁcult to establish owing to the fact that war efforts are histori- cally driven by various factors not limited to resource constraints, yet the present study can offer some evidence on the relation between the two. There should be little doubt that contiguous countries in Europe are easily susceptible to the disruptions arising from conﬂicts that also caused millions to cross over borders and seek asylum in neighbouring countries. Once again, provision of food, shelter and fuel would stretch a number of these countries such as Poland, Czech Republic and others and exac- erbate the overall adjustment from crisis. Notably, the new pattern of international trade that dominates the global order is via exchange of intermediate commodities between countries. This forms the basis of the well-known global value chains (GVCs). When the GVCs get affected due to conﬂicts, production shifts to other locations and might lead to higher cost of production, lower consumer welfare and increase in poverty and inequality. We use inequality estimates also to observe if there is

5 RESOURCES, ECONOMIC PROSPERITY … 73 any impact on the military expenditures incurred by countries round the world. Economic Sanctions In recent times, with advances in information technology, a common response to global conﬂict has been the imposition of economic sanctions on countries that do not follow the general agreements regarding economic, military, civil and other protocols. Usually, subjects as sensitive as nuclear proliferation or civil conﬂicts, religious intolerance, harbouring of terrorist organisations and the like are scrutinised by one or more multilateral agencies with voting rights from member countries. Based on the resolution, as in the past, countries deviating from globally accepted limits face various kinds of sanctions from the global consortia. In the past, Iran, North Korea, Cuba, and partly India and Pakistan went through these phases whereby the suggestions made by the multi- lateral agencies were not adopted leading to different penalties imposed from time to time. Russia is presently facing these sanctions in various forms. These sanctions take the form of discontinuing diplomatic ties, voluntary withdrawals and restrictions imposed by private entities, trade sanctions, blocking of foreign aid, etc. The sanctions may also take the form of discriminatory trade and ﬁnancial practices by the imposing country on the penalised nation. With newer technologies and virtual dependence on electronic transactions, movement of capital across coun- tries can be restricted quite promptly as well. For example, at the begin- ning of the invasion, Canada ordered removal of all Russian commodities from the shelves of their supermarkets, boycotting of Russian brands and above all putting Russia out of the ﬁnancial network through de-linking SWIFT services which is at the core of international funds transfers glob- ally. As before, these sanctions come at a cost beyond the issuing and the recipient nations, since these activities have wider economic coverage which gets limited and might cause disruptions elsewhere including substantial unemployment, bankruptcy and breaks in value chains. While many countries have arranged for alternative procedures, the global impact of disruption in the network may not be trivial. Similarly, the nation-states directly involved in the conﬂict are also exposed to economic impacts outside of the direct problems arising from war. The sanctions on exports or the inability to buy essential raw mate- rials and intermediate goods affects millions of producers at home. This

74 S. KAR may on the one hand cause exodus of producers and skilled workers not directly involved in conﬂicts to other locations, and on the other cause both inﬂationary and deﬂationary pressure on the home economy. Economic stagﬂation, i.e. stagnancy in growth and inﬂation happening at the same time, is a common outcome of global conﬂicts as many coun- tries witnessed through the two world wars. For a few countries, war may be a way out of depression as investments in infrastructure, mili- tarisation and other growth-enhancing activities can help outweigh the negative inﬂuences of stagnant episodes. Yet, the increasingly connected global order does not imply an unambiguous beneﬁt and could affect many other countries disproportionately. The direct and indirect impact of war and expenditure on defence and allied public procurements can therefore coexist in a ﬂedgling economy. The pass-through effect of higher fuel prices onto the local economy is another source of how conﬂict spreads unfavourable impact on other countries. The outcome is not unmixed since even during conﬂicts allies tend to beneﬁt from trade diversion, including access to more fuel and energy and trying to ﬁnd new markets and locations outside the zone that practice economic sanctions. For the Russian economy, the exchange rate has become substantially weaker vis-à-vis dominant currencies which should imply that imports would be even more expensive. The companies that depend on imported inputs will suffer the most and rents earned from local resources will be lower in this situation. Even if the inva- sion ends abruptly, many investors believe that political stability will see a signiﬁcant uptick as a key site-selection factor across Central and Eastern Europe (Oneal et al. 2003). This brief discussion points out that the opportunity cost of any conﬂict is not easily measurable. Consequently, a limited effort is put forward where a predictive analysis is based on how the fall in resource rents leads to a rise in militarisation in countries that have either engaged in war or might do so in near future. Notwith- standing this possibility, there are other reasons why countries practice greater militarisation. Fearon ( 2018) shows that militarisation or expen- diture on arms within a country serves not only as deterrent, but also as a limit to military competition. Furthermore, during economic/ﬁnancial crises, the stress from international negotiations can easily scale up to situations of conﬂict. Indeed, a country suffering from internal disputes, economic slowdown and poor growth could initiate conﬂicts (Russett and Oneal 2001; Schultz 2001). Access to natural resources of value could be behind unusual cross-border tensions leading to conﬂicts. Fall in internal

5 RESOURCES, ECONOMIC PROSPERITY … 75 resource base could also lead to a situation of conﬂict and forceful occu- pation of territory—as a common historical pettern often meeting with episodic conﬂicts between countries. Indeed, the earlier seminal explana- tions by Fearon ( 1995) touch upon this issue, but the detailed scope of the subject presently being explored is of much recent origin. Finally, various policy and governance-related weaknesses offer consid- erable scope for improvements. Available statistics shows that adoption of global policies by multilateral institutions on war, war crime and conﬂicts arising from disputes over land, water and other resources have been partly successful. The acceptance of treaties and violations has had fairly soft political repercussions and for larger countries imparted marginal impact only. Thus, the probability of getting into conﬂicts remains high at all times. Economic Growth, Rents and Military Expenditure The relationship between economic growth and military expenditure is not linear. Extensive data on military expenditure at the country level is available from the World Development Indicators (WDI)—a database maintained by the World Bank. The data is described in detail below to explain the coverage and purpose of the brief exercise that follows. We use a dependent or target variable denoted as the Military expen- ditures as percentage of GDP for our analysis. Comparable variables are identiﬁed as military expenditure as percentage of general government expenditure; military expenditure in current US dollar; etc. This data is extracted from SIPRI, Sweden, and based on the NATO deﬁnitions, which includes all current and capital expenditures on the armed forces, including peacekeeping forces; defence ministries and other government agencies engaged in defence projects; paramilitary forces, if adjudged to be trained and equipped for military operations; and military space activ- ities. Such expenditures include military and civil personnel, counting retirement pensions and social services of defence personnel; operational and maintenance costs; procurement costs; defence research and devel- opment not least, military aid (within the defence expenditures of the donor country). The data excludes civil defence and also, the current expenditures for previous military activities, such as beneﬁts for veterans, demobilisation, conversion and destruction of weapons.

76 S. KAR Note that, this deﬁnition cannot be applied for all countries, since information is not uniform and because military budget includes various types of items that differ across countries. In many countries, military budgets may or may not cover civil defence, reserves and/or auxil- iary forces, police and/or paramilitary forces, and dual-purpose forces, defence-related grants in kind, pensions for defence personnel and other intra-governmental social security contributions. Especially, in countries with federal systems, the maintenance of internal law and order is often a state subject and is funded separately from the budgetary allocations for military provisions. The data extracted from the WDI also includes: (i) mineral rent; (ii) oil rent; (iii) CPIA transparency; (iv) male unemployment rate; (v) Gini Index; (vi) income share of top 10% of population; (vii) income share of lowest 10% of population; and (viii) GDP growth rate per capita. Let us quickly deﬁne the variables that we have used in two stages: (1) for country groups across the world and (2) for select 25 countries that record at least one country-level war between 1998 and 2022. In this regard, it should be useful to note that the PRIO Conﬂict Recurrence Database by Uppsala Conﬂict Data Program (UCDP) reports several instances of repeated wars between countries (Gleditsch et al. 2002; Sundberg and Melander 2013). The project extends previous data on organised violence. This new dataset expands and deepens available infor- mation and understanding of the various reasons behind as well as the conditions under which armed conﬂicts persist and recur. The selection of regions from the WDI and subsequently a panel of 25 countries are primarily based on the information listed in the PRIO database, but further subjected to availability of continuous and long-run data. To deﬁne, Mineral rents are the difference between the value of production and the total costs of production. Minerals like tin, gold, lead, zinc, iron, copper, nickel, silver, bauxite and phosphate are included in the calculation. It should imply that a country with shrinking mineral base shall experience higher cost of production, and if a small producer by global standards, then an unchanged global price. In other words, coun- tries may face falling mineral rent if it continues to remain underdeveloped (implying less inﬂuence on global price setting for such items) with high dependence on mineral as primary commodity for exports. Similarly, Oil rents are the difference between the value of crude oil production at regional prices and total costs of production. As standard, male unemploy- ment rate refers to the share of the labour force that is without work but

5 RESOURCES, ECONOMIC PROSPERITY … 77 available for and seeking employment. The GDP growth is also a standard variable, commonly referred to as the growth of gross domestic product over time. In addition, we use an interaction variable where we marry the mineral rent to oil rent and wish to verify if the joint impact has any importance for determining the extent of military spending incurred by the country groups or individual countries. Since the Gini index, i.e. the aggregate measure of inequality, is not available for country groups, we additionally use income share of top 10% population vis-à-vis the income share of lowest 10% in lieu of the infrequent observations for overall inequality measures. This is used for the country-level analysis, only. Finally, CPIA refers to the corruption and other indicators, where, transparency, accountability, and corruption in the public sector assess the extent to which the executive can be held accountable for its use of funds and for the results of its actions by the electorate and by the legislature and judiciary, and the extent to which public employees within the executive are required to account for administrative decisions, use of resources, and results obtained. The three main dimensions assessed here are the accountability of the executive to oversight institutions and of public employees for their performance, access of civil society to information on public affairs, and state capture by narrow vested interests (indexmundi 2019). It must be pointed out that not all of these variables bear signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the target variable and therefore have been used sparingly. Graphical Representations Figure 5.1 takes into account the 12 country groups that were extracted from the WDI database as explained in Sect. 3. These country groups include South Asia, sub-Saharan Africa, Africa Eastern and Southern, Central Europe and the Baltic, East Asia and Paciﬁc, heavily indebted poor countries (HIPC), Latin America and Caribbean, low- and middle- income countries, Europe and Central Asia, North America, Middle East and North Africa (MENA) and OECD member countries as the point of reference. The line ﬁtted (predicted) to the military expenditure as percentage of GDP (represented along the vertical axis), along with the conﬁdence intervals (shaded area), shows an almost constant and gently declining trend across country groups. The scatter points repre- sent the military expenditure incurred by the country groups between

78 S. KAR 1998 and 2022. Majority of the country groups show a consolidated mili- tary expenditure between 1.5 and 6.5% of GDP . The bunching of military expenditure data around 4.5–5% of GDP growth across country groups (represented along the horizontal axis) shows that most country groups with decent GDP growth keep the military expenditure almost constant over time, with some years showing lower or higher expenditure shares. For the country groups, Fig. 5.2 displays the groups in separate panels for two variables, namely the military expenditure as % of GDP and the GDP per capita growth. Most country groups show a constant share of GDP being spent on military expenditure even when the GDP growth has dipped in speciﬁc periods, including during the 2008–09 global ﬁnancial crisis and the COVID-19-related economic deceleration. It may be owing to the consumables for the defence industry, including equipment, machinery, transport, etc., and the salary components of the personnel. Regardless, these graphical depictions point to the fact that -2 0 2 4 6 -10 -5 0 5 10 GDP growth Miliexpgdp 95% CI predicted miliexpgdp Fig. 5.1 Relationship between GDP growth and military expenditure as % of GDP for country groups. Source Author’s calculations

5 RESOURCES, ECONOMIC PROSPERITY … 79 most economies continue to allocate a substantial portion towards mili- tary expenditure for the last three decades, even when economic hardship has been quite severe. Indeed, the countries belonging to the MENA group report higher than 5% of the GDP spent on military activities with occasional rise in the rate. In order to interpret Fig. 5.3, we need to explain the underlying proce- dure brieﬂy. The purpose behind the depiction of country groups for two variables in Fig. 5.3 has been to understand the co-movements of the mili- tary expenditure and mineral rent, where the cyclical ﬂuctuations around the trend are considered. The de-trending of cycles from trend values of a variable extended over a sufﬁciently long time horizon allows one to understand the movements by periods, in this case on a yearly basis. If the cyclical values of the other variable display similar patterns—rising when the other rises and falling alongside the comparable cycle—the relationship is known as pro-cyclical for contemporaneous time. It can conversely be counter-cyclical or acyclical if the correlation between these -10 -5 0 5 10-10 -5 0 5 10-10 -5 0 5 10 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 AfricaEastern-Southern Central Europe and Baltics East_Asia_Pacific Europe-Central-Asia Heavily-Indebted-poor-Countries Latin-America-Carribbean Low-Middle-Income MENA North-America SSAfrica South Asia Militexp%GDP GDPPCG% Year Graphs by Country Fig. 5.2 Long-run trends in military expenditure as % of GDP and GDPPC growth. Source Author’s calculations

80 S. KAR variables is negative or close to zero, respectively. Note that, this relation- ship does not allow us to estimate the causal relation between the two variables, however. In this case, the two cycles for most country groups are negatively correlated, implying that when the mineral rents are high the military expenditure is low and vice versa. Albeit we cannot as yet identify the functional relation between the two, it still suggests that for country groups which earn a lot of mineral rent, the military expendi- ture as percentage of GDP does not rise by much and vice versa. The cyclical component of the variable can only be extracted with the help of a formulation that we explain next. Hodrick and Prescott ( 1997) motivated the Hodrick–Prescott (HP) ﬁlter as a trend-removal technique that could be applied to data emanating from a wide class of data-generating processes. In their view, the technique speciﬁed a trend in the data, and the data was ﬁltered by removing the trend. The smoothness of the trend depends on a param- eter λ. The trend becomes smoother as λ →∞. Hodrick and Prescott -1 0 1 2-1 0 1 2-1 0 1 2 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 AfricaEastern-Southern Central Europe and Baltics East_Asia_Pacific Europe-Central-Asia Heavily-Indebted-poor-Countries Latin-America-Carribbean Low-Middle-Income MENA North-America SSAfrica South Asia milExpGrwthCycle Mineral_rentGrwthCycle Year Graphs by Country Fig. 5.3 Relationship between military expenditure growth cycle and mineral rent growth cycle across country groups. Source Author’s calculations

5 RESOURCES, ECONOMIC PROSPERITY … 81 (1997) recommended setting λ to 1600 for quarterly data and 100 for annual data. Causal Relationships Presently, therefore, we may try to identify if any of these variables are responsible for the changes in the observed movements of the military expenditure as percentage of GDP. The variables of interest are listed and deﬁned in full detail under Sect. 3. We use panel regression methods, where all countries with the same set of variables are stacked on top of each other. The panel data has both a cross section, presently captured by the dependent and independent variables, and a time element that runs between 1998 and 2022. The cross section and the time spread jointly offer reasonable variability for the country groups allowing us to estimate if the independent variables signiﬁcantly affect the dependent variable or not. The variables used in Table 5.1 are listed along with it. Let us brieﬂy explain what the table offers in terms of the estimates. To qualify the results, it should be useful to know that we use a tech- nique known as ﬁxed effects (FE) panel regression in column (1) in Table 5.1, whereby the variations across country groups are modelled in a way such that the parameters are ﬁxed or non-random quantities. We have tested (not reported here) if conversely the parameters are random, and the results do not support that assertion such that we continue with the FE model. In column 1, the FE model points out that the GDP growth does not affect the military expenditure in a statistically signiﬁ- cant manner, although the coefﬁcient (0.0142) is positive. The number just below the coefﬁcient is the standard error—the bigger is the error term compared to the coefﬁcient, poorer is the impact of that inde- pendent variable on the dependent variable. Conversely, growth in male unemployment (grmunemp) is positive and signiﬁcant. The coefﬁcient here means the following: if growth in male unemployment rate rises by 100% (meaning unemployment rate doubles), the military expendi- ture as % of GDP shall rise by 46%. One explanation of this could be the ‘public good’ argument, whereby the government treats defence expenditure as a means to create jobs and income multiplier through public investment and consumption expenditure when other sources fail to generate desirable employment. Another possible explanation could be to create war-like situations with neighbours or adversaries that can subside potential domestic unrest against unemployment and inﬂation.

82 S. KAR Table 5.1 Impact of independent variables on military expenditure for country groups (1) (2) (3) Independent variables Fixed Effects GMM GMM L.miliexpgdp – 0.770*** 0.762*** (0.0371) (0.0346) Gdpgrowth 0.0142 −0.00572 −0.00410 (0.0109) (0.00628) (0.00607) Grmunemp 0.458** 0.340*** 0.321*** (0.196) (0.112) (0.112) Grminrl −0.0337* −0.0300*** −0.0273** (0.0195) (0.0108) (0.0109) Minoil −0.0294*** 0.00188 (0.00648) (0.00393) Groil −0.0204* (0.0122) Constant 2.217*** 0.513*** 0.532*** (0.0410) (0.0840) (0.0775) Observations 276 264 264 R-squared 0.105 Number of countryid 12 12 12 Dependent variable: military expenditure as % of GDP Independent variables: military expenditure from previous period (to estimate own effects over time or inertia, L.miliexpgdp); GDP growth (Gdpgrowth); growth in male unemployment rate (Grmunemp); growth in mineral rent (Grminrl); growth in oil rent (Groil); and an interaction term between mineral and oil rents (Minoil). Standard errors in parentheses *** p <0.01 (high signiﬁcance), ** p <0.05 (moderate signiﬁcance), * p <0.1(low signiﬁcance) Source Author’s calculations Yet another explanation could be a motive to annex other territories, one that has been historically observed several times, in order to expand the resource base at the time of declining mineral reserves. These need further research. As brieﬂy discussed above, the growth of mineral rent (Grminrl)l e a d s to a fall in the military expenditure. Table 5.1, column 1 shows that doubling of mineral rent reduces military expenditure by 3.38%. Simi- larly, the joint contribution of mineral rent and oil rent (Minoil)l o w e r s military expenditure by 2.99%. In other words, the rise in mineral rent itself and further combined with oil rent can potentially lower military expenditure across these country groups by almost 6.5%. Since country groups comprise of countries at different stages of economic growth and

5 RESOURCES, ECONOMIC PROSPERITY … 83 development, the mean impact is moderated as an overall outcome. For some countries, individually speaking, the combination could lead to a steeper fall in military expenditure, whereas for others impact could be small. The constant term captures the intercept of the regression line and a positive (statistically signiﬁcant) value indicates that military expenditure starts from a level above zero, but its trajectory depends on the positive and negative impact of all the other variables included in column 1. The next two columns use the dynamic version of the panel regres- sion. We use the dynamic panel data estimates, in particular system GMM (Generalized Method of Moments with further details in Arellano and Bond, 1991, and recent applications and explanations in Dutta et al. 2020). Including a lagged dependent variable as a regressor violates strict exogeneity, because the lagged dependent variable is necessarily corre- lated with the idiosyncratic error. When the strict exogeneity assumption is violated, commonly used static panel data techniques such as ﬁxed effects (FE) estimators are inconsistent. The method via which we resolve concerns about endogeneity is the dynamic panel estimators. In recent decades, the use of dynamic panel estimators for cross-country panels (or ﬁrm-level, state-level panels) has been frequently used. The dynamic processes in economic activities, or as in this case, war and war-like events across countries, make dynamic panel estimation useful specially to control for unobservable heterogeneity. For ordinary least square or ﬁxed effect models, the unobserved individual effects can be correlated not only with the endogenous regressors but also with predetermined regres- sors. Note that, the data amenable to Difference GMM (DGMM) model, which is a variant of the structure we use here, was proposed by Arel- lano and Bond ( 1991) that removes the unobserved individual effect and associated omitted variables bias by ﬁrst differencing the equation. It is designed for small ‘T’ (time) large ‘N’ (cross-section observations) panels, a dependent variable that is dynamic in nature, an equation including right-hand side variables that are not strictly exogenous and a panel that is subjected to unobserved heterogeneity, a panel with ﬁxed ﬁrm (or country) effects and presence of heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation within countries (Baum et al. 2003). Our cross-country panel does not need the application of DGMM. Consequently, we continue with the system GMM speciﬁcation. Further, we conducted panel unit root tests (Im-Pesaran-Shin method, given that the country panel is not strictly balanced) for each series, from the dependent variable and the main independent variable to all other

84 S. KAR entries in the set of controls. We use all such variables that are stationery in its original form or made stationery (a stationary process has the prop- erty that the mean, variance and autocorrelation structure do not change over time) by time series techniques. This and remaining workout follow standard textbook procedures and therefore not explicitly reported. Table 5.2, column 2 shows that the lagged values (previous year’s) of the dependent variable are capable of explaining the current patterns of military expenditure. It implies that country groups that embarked on positive military expenditure in previous years will continue to do so (coefﬁcient is 0.770), at least as much as 77% of the previous years’ expen- diture. Next, we ﬁnd the GDP growth not to be statistically signiﬁcant, although the coefﬁcient value is negative (−0.00572). A statistically non- signiﬁcant value is reported as no impact. The unemployment growth as in column 1 is positive and signiﬁcant implying that the country groups will continue to expand military spending with rise in domestic unemploy- ment. The mineral rent is negative and signiﬁcant, but the joint impact is no longer signiﬁcant. In column 3, we add the growth of oil rent and it too negatively affects the military expenditure. In addition, we ﬁnd that the constant term is smaller in magnitude, such that the variables chosen as explanatory factors offer sufﬁciently strong explanation of what leads to rise or fall in military expenditure as percentage of GDP for country groups. The individual country experiences, is what we offer next. Cross-country Experience In this sub-section, we compile data for 25 countries that have according to the SIPRI (referred to in Sect. 3) database experienced at least one war between 1998 and 2022. The list of countries is not exhaustive and has further been screened by availability of data on a continuous basis. These countries include Afghanistan, Albania, Angola, Bolivia, Bosnia- Herzegovina, Chad, China, Congo DPR and Republic of Congo, Croatia, France, India, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Liberia, Pakistan, Russia, Rwanda, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom and United States. Consequently, the set covers high-income, middle-income and low- income countries from various parts of the world and therefore expected to generate sufﬁcient heterogeneity and control. As mentioned brieﬂy, we estimate the military expenditure in logarithmic scale (to alleviate prob- lems with scale of operations) based on logarithmic values of per capita GDP. In addition, to capture the extent of inequality (see Fearon 2010,

5 RESOURCES, ECONOMIC PROSPERITY … 85 Table 5.2 Impact of independent variables on military expenditure for countries (1) (2) Variables FE FE Gdppcgr −0.0218** −0.0224** (0.00886) (0.00898) inc_shrtop 0.0495*** 0.0439** (0.0151) (0.0200) inc_shrlow −0.0725 (0.169) Constant 1.291*** 1.640* (0.437) (0.925) Observations 272 272 R-squared 0.060 0.061 Number of id 24 24 Source Author’s calculations Dependent V ariable: military expenditure as % of GDP; Indepen- dent V ariables: GDP per capita growth (Gdppcgr); income share of top 10% population (inc_shrtop); income share of lowest 10% population (inc_shrlow) with respect to civil war and violent conﬂicts as outcomes of inequality and governance failure) in these countries—which could be respon- sible for different kinds of war, including civil war requiring extensive deployment of military forces and hence accounting for rising expendi- ture—we select the section of population with income in the uppermost and lowermost deciles. Note that, the well-known measure of inequality, namely Gini Index, is largely unavailable for most of these countries over substantial period of time. To begin with Fig. 5.4 is a graphical predictor of the scale of military expenditure at the cross-country level. It shows that when plotted against the per capita gross domestic product, the relationship is concave to the origin. The level of military expenditure slopes down signiﬁcantly, starting from higher expenditure for select countries with low per capita GDP to lower levels for countries with high per capita GDP . Since the value of the military expenditure is in US dollar, the absolute value (in log scale) declines with higher GDP recorded for the set of countries. Next, we show that the tendency is not universal, since with even higher income share for the top 10% people on the income distribution of respective countries it is likely that the military expenditures rise in these

86 S. KAR15 20 25 30 -4 -2 0 2 4 lngdppc lnmilusd 95% CI predicted lnmilusd Fig. 5.4 Military expenditure in US$ vis-à-vis per capita GDP (both in logarithmic scale). Source Author’s calculations countries on average. Table 5.2 column 1 is based on the same empir- ical procedures discussed for country groups above. In column 1, the negative coefﬁcient of GDP per capita growth (−0.0218) implies a fall in absolute amount of military expenditure on average. The next entry is the income share which generates a positive and statistically signiﬁcant coefﬁcient (0.0495). The value of the coefﬁcient indicates that doubling of the income share of the top 10% population shall raise military expen- diture as % of GDP by 5%. Compared to the graph, in this case we use military expenditure as percentage of GDP and show (column 2) that the rise in the income share of the lower 10% population does not affect the military expenditure (although the coefﬁcient is negative, it is not statis- tically signiﬁcant). For any economy where the income shares of the top 10% rise more than the lowest 10%, inequality rises. In this case even if we assume that the rise has been exactly same, the impact is driven by the share of top 10%. It should be useful to remember that in most democratic countries the ‘median voter’ (the group of people with median

5 RESOURCES, ECONOMIC PROSPERITY … 87 income in the country) often decides on the public policies, including the expenditure patterns. The public choice ranges from policies regarding public distribution to protection against imports as a reﬂection of the preferences of the ‘common man’. War and military expenditure often does not follow this preference pattern sometimes owing to exigency of circumstances, and in other cases due to the control on national poli- cies by the elite. While this rudimentary exercise does not allow us to comment more on this subject, it is at least indicative of the fact that greater militarisation could be an exclusive choice of the wealthier popu- lation in these countries, whereas income growth facing the mass advices against greater expenditure on these provisions. Furthermore, the owner- ship of resources, such as petroleum, coal and minerals, with industrial houses and corporate might form a common set with the wealthier section of the population, such that the previous argument also ﬁnds country- wise validity. However, the present study shelves this and other dynamic speciﬁcations for future attention. Concluding Remarks The present study has been largely exploratory in nature. The main issue that we deal with is whether availability of natural resources, especially those covering oil, minerals and base metals in a country or a group of countries, is a good predictor of war activities in such places. Incidences of war for respective countries are available as discrete data from compi- lations over time. Since war is largely a discontinuous event, although the world as a unit experiences some war at all times but occurring in different places, a good proxy for war is deemed useful. In this study, we collected data on various types of military expenditure across country groups and subsequently for 25 countries across the world that a recent database identiﬁes to have been engaged in one or more war between 1998 and 2022. For the country groups, we also collected supporting information on the average GDP and per capita GDP during the time period, mineral and oil rents which fall for smaller countries with depletion of resources mostly, and data for male unemployment rates. Our hypotheses for the choice of variables were that GDP per capita growth lowers military expenditure, rise in mineral and oil rents also lower military expenditure while rise in male unemployment raises military expenditure. Various spec- iﬁcations, empirically speaking, have been deployed to ﬁnd convincing

88 S. KAR results that would either validate or refute the above hypotheses. We ﬁnd that for country groups, the GDP growth is not a signiﬁcant determi- nant, but the rise in mineral and oil rent unambiguously lowers military expenditure—a possibility that might deter war over time if it offers wider validity. The rise in unemployment, as we have tested repeatedly for empirical robustness, also proves the hypothesis to be correct. The higher the male unemployment rate, the greater is the military expendi- ture incurred on average. Since we deal with country groups, it will not be similar for all countries within the group; yet the rise on average implies that most countries in the group engage in higher spending compared to those that reduce it over time. Indeed, our graphs show several entries on growth of military expenditure to be below zero, implying that some of them tend to de-militarise or de-escalate such expenditures from time to time. We extend this brieﬂy to 25 countries chosen as per recorded war efforts—although the nature and claimed purpose of the war differs widely as do the country-level acknowledgement of what should be termed as war. Notwithstanding, we deployed two simple exercises for the set of countries. First, we looked at the impact of per capita GDP growth on military expenditure as percentage of GDP in these countries. The obtained coefﬁcient represents the average or mean across all countries with observed dissimilarities between countries in this matter. However, the estimates resoundingly prove that with rise in per capita GDP the military expenditures tend to fall over time and across countries. Subse- quently we chose two new variables in order to explore income inequality in each country as possible determinant of military expenditure. Here we ﬁnd that the rise in income share of the wealthier section of the popu- lation raises military expenditure, while that of the poorest section has no impact. We explained possible causal relations between these identi- ﬁcations and hope to explore more along these lines by drawing upon the resource ownership and rent for various income deciles for the set of countries in future extensions. References Arellano, M., and S. Bond. 1991. Some tests of speciﬁcation for panel data: Monte Carlo evidence and an application to employment equations. Review of Economic Studies 58: 277–297.

5 RESOURCES, ECONOMIC PROSPERITY … 89 Arellano, M., and O. Bover. 1995. Another look at the instrumental variable estimation of error-components models. Journal of Econometrics 68 (1): 29– 51. Baum, C., M. Schaffer, and S. Stillman. 2003. Instrumental variables and GMM: Estimation and testing. Stata Journal, Stata Corp LP 3 (1): 1–31. Blundell, R., and S. Bond. 1998. Initial conditions and moment restrictions in dynamic panel data models. Journal of Econometrics 87: 115–143. Blundell, R., S. Bond, and F. Windmeijer. 2001. Estimation in dynamic panel data models: Improving on the performance of the standard GMM estimators. In Nonstationary panels, panel cointegration, and dynamic panels,e d . B . H . Baltagi, T.B. Fomby, and R.C. Hill, 53–91. Emerald Limited. CPIA transparency, accountability, and corruption in the public sector rating. 2019. https://www.indexmundi.com/facts/indicators/IQ.CPA.TRAN.XQ#: ~:text=Definition:%20Transparency,%20accountability,%20and%20corrupt ion%20in%20the%20public,administrative%20decisions,%20use%20of%20reso urces,%20and%20results%20obtained. Dutta, N., and R.S. Sobel. 2016. Does corruption ever help entrepreneurship? Small Business Economics 47: 179–199. Dutta, N., D. Jana, and S. Kar. 2020. Does state-level per capita income affect juvenile delinquency? An empirical analysis for Indian states. Economic Modelling 87: 109–120. Fearon, J.D. 1995. Rationalist explanations for war. International Organization 49 (3): 379–414. Fearon, J. 2018. Cooperation, conﬂict, and the costs of anarchy. International Organization 72 (3): 523–559. Fearon, J. 2010. Governance and civil war onset. Background Paper to World Development Report 2011. World Bank. Gleditsch, N.P ., P . Wallensteen, M. Eriksson, M. Sollenberg, and H. Strand. 2002. Armed conﬂict 1946–2001: A new dataset. Journal of Peace Research 39 (5): 615–637. Hodrick, R., and Prescott, E. 1997. Postwar U.S. business cycles: An empirical investigation. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 29(1), 1–16. Muggah, R., and Dryganiv, R. 2022. Russia’s resource grab in Ukraine, Foreign Policy. Oneal, J.R., B. Russett, and M.L. Berbaum. 2003. Causes of peace: Democracy, interdependence, and international organizations, 1885–1992. International Studies Quarterly 47 (3): 371–393. Roodman, D. 2009. How to do xtabond2: An introduction to difference and system GMM in Stata. The Stata Journal 9 (1): 86–136. Russett, B., and J. Oneal. 2001. Triangulating peace: Democracy, interdepen- dence, and international organizations.W .W :N o r t o n .

90 S. KAR Schultz, K.A. 2001. Looking for audience costs. The Journal of Conﬂict Resolution 45 (1): 32–60. Sundberg, R., & E. Melander. 2013. Introducing the UCDP georeferenced event dataset. Journal of Peace Research 50 (4): 523–532.

PART II Understanding the Key Drivers of Permacrisis

CHAPTER 6 On the Geoeconomics Drivers of International Conﬂicts Apurba Kumar Bardalai The past few years have been difﬁcult with a growing number of global conﬂicts. To make things worse, the pandemic, followed by Russia’s inva- sion of Ukraine, has threatened international peace and security. Security is a subject with an array of hazards that comprises anything from conven- tional war between two states, asymmetric war, cyber warfare, and even computer viruses. It leads to a rise in demand for security-related goods and services and the involvements of government and business sector. In a broad sense, it establishes a clear relationship between security and economic activity, and the use of economics to defend national inter- ests and produce beneﬁcial geopolitical results. Lately, some analysts have accused China of using its ‘debt-trap diplomacy’ as part of its ‘Belt and Road Initiative’ to gain control over strategic infrastructures abroad. In other words, the use of economic tools to achieve strategic goals is ‘geoe- conomics’ (Roberts et al. 2018). Geoeconomics works best in a complex A. K. Bardalai (B) Indian Army (Retd.), Delhi, India e-mail: tonybardalai@gmail.com © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapor e Pte Ltd. 2024 O. Mishra and S. Sen (eds.), Global Political Economy, Geopolitics and International Security , https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-97-2231-0_6 93

94 A. K. BARDALAI security environment. For example, taking advantage of the chaos in some African nations, Russia is using the Wagner group to take control of valu- able natural resources and partnering with African juntas to avoid Western sanctions (Karr 2023a, b). In the variable relationship between interna- tional security and geoeconomics, economic interests become the driver when the distance from the home state to the place of interest is far away. But as the distances reduce, their positions are interchanged with secu- rity becoming the locomotive pulling other components of the national strategy. To amplify, in the immediate neighbourhood of a country, secu- rity becomes the main component of nations’ strategic goals. This chapter aims to explain such inter-linkages and connect the dots between security and economics vis-à-vis geopolitics by drawing examples from some of the major conﬂicts worldwide. Finally, an attempt will be made to collate the inferences in the concluding section to adumbrate upon the contempo- rary geoeconomic drivers of international security. Since Africa hosts the maximum number of conﬂicts, the ﬁrst part will begin with the African region. Th e A f r i c a n Re g i o n Democratic Republic of Congo In the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), the conﬂict began between 1994 and 1996 to shelter roughly two million Hutus ﬂeeing Rwanda for fear of retaliation by the Tutsis. Their presence later led to ethnic tension followed by a turf war over the mineral wealth in Eastern DRC. The DRC is a very big country in sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) in terms of territory and possesses exceptional natural resources. It is rich in minerals like cobalt and copper. Most of the raw material deposits are still untapped worth US$ 24 trillion including the world’s largest coltan reserve and a consider- able amount of cobalt (GSP Hub n.d.). Fighting continues with regional neighbours jumping into it and many multinational companies trying to extract their share of wealth has driven tens of thousands of people from their homes and could spiral into a wider regional proxy war. Last year, Congolese President Félix Tshisekedi invited Ugandan troops to ﬁght the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) which is an Islamic rebel group based in Uganda and DRC. President also appears to have quietly approved Burundian operations on Congolese soil. This has irked Rwandan Presi- dent Paul Kagame. Rwanda aspires to wield inﬂuence in eastern Congo

6 ON THE GEOECONOMICS DRIVERS OF INTERNATIONAL … 95 for economic reasons (Dallaire 2003). Currently, as reported by Gavin, there is persisting insecurity in eastern DRC because of multiple internal actors jockeying for territory and resources (Gavin 2023). Besides, M23, a previously dormant rebel group, which is backed by Rwanda, is wreaking havoc in the eastern Democratic Republic of Congo. The M23 includes ex-Congolese soldiers, many of whom are Tutsis, and is Rwanda’s force to extract Congolese resources (Crisis Group Commentary 2023). South Sudan The conﬂict in South Sudan is an internal ﬁght between two main communities Dinka and Nuer, led by President Salva Kiir and his former deputy Riek Machar, respectively. Immediately after its independence in 2011, internal ﬁghting began. The struggle for independence had begun in 1956 and was ethno-religious in content. However, the internal ﬁghting after it gained independence was ethno-political. By the time the peace agreement of 2018 was signed, thousands of lives were lost, and millions were displaced. The main source of revenue of South Sudan comes from its oil exports. It produces around 150,000–170,000 barrels per day. But its actual income is only from around 45, 000 barrels. Rest is shared with the international companies and as fees to Sudan. There are several key players in the oil market in South Sudan including China and India (Mordor Intelligence n.d.). With its oil reserve around 3.5 billion barrels, the third highest in sub-Saharan Africa next to Nigeria and Angola and 90% of oil resources still untapped, South Sudan has great potential and hence attracted attention from outside the country (Irvin-Hunt and Makoni 2022). In the intra-state conﬂict in South Sudan, the control of natural wealth has become the driving factor. The leaders leading their communities are probably beneﬁtting the most from the ongoing conﬂict. As reported, both the President and the Vice President are known to have already accumulated a lot of wealth (The Sentry 2016). The Sahel The Sahel region is around a 6000-km-long corridor across Africa connecting the Red Sea to the Atlantic with sands to the North and rain- forests to the South. One of the key factors driving the current state in the Sahel region is the combination and collision of geography, history, and the creation of a nation-state. Much of the Sahel was under French

96 A. K. BARDALAI control and was a trading route for captured ivory, gold, and black slaves from the South to the North and luxury goods from the North to the Southern cities. The region also collided with other spheres of inﬂuence like the British expansion in Egypt, Sudan and British Somaliland, Italian- controlled Libya, and Spain in Western Sahara. The spheres of inﬂuence ﬁrst translated to administrative regions and later the de facto boundary when most of the countries became independent but did not agree to boundaries forced upon them by their past colonial masters giving rise to rebellion by the oppressed groups, which continues even today (Marshal 2021). Mali is one such example. Resenting that they were being lumped into a state that they did not recognise and always considered backward, Tuareg, the nomadic tribe from the North, began its rebellion two years after Mail’s independence in 1960. This uprising was followed by periodic violence and was brutally suppressed by the Malian Army. The latest rebel- lion took place in 2012. The key provisions of the peace accord of 2015 remain unimplemented because of several reasons. While the Tuaregs are now sitting on the side of the government, the armed groups, who have signed the peace accord are changing their alliance partners and are yet to be demobilised. Side by side, the rebellion has been hijacked by the jihadi movement spreading to central Mali and other areas (Karr 2023a, b). As if it was not enough, in August 2020, Col. Assimi Goïta seized power in Mali, detaining the transitional President Bah Ndaw and Prime Minister Moctar Ouane. While United Nations Multidimensional Inte- grated Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), which was mandated to provide logistical support to G 5 forces (Burkina Faso, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, and Chad), found it difﬁcult to meet the complex challenges after the French pulled out of Mali in August 2022 in the face of Russian merce- nary Wagner group ﬁghting on the side of the government soldiers. Later, as asked by the junta government, in accordance with United Nations Security Council Resolution 2690, MINUSMA closed on December 31, 2023. Even though Mali by itself is not very rich in minerals, it has the potential to be an important factor in conﬂict resolution. The Ministry of Mines estimates “Mali has 800 tons of gold deposits, two million tons of iron ore, ﬁve thousand tons of uranium, 20 million tons of manganese, four million tons of lithium, and ten million tons of limestone” (Interna- tional Trade Administration, U.S. Department of Commerce 2022). Mali also has gold and deposits of manganese and bauxite, which are used in

6 ON THE GEOECONOMICS DRIVERS OF INTERNATIONAL … 97 electronics. The rebel movement in Mali accentuated because of discrim- ination and oppression. But it is only a matter of time before the armed groups start ﬁghting for the available and untapped natural wealth as a source of income for the continuation of their movement. Neighbouring Niger and Chad have uranium, from which traces of rare earth materials can be extracted. Uranium from Niger, the world’s fourth largest producer, helps the French fuel its nuclear industry. The big challenge for Niger is the number of armed groups that have spilt over from its neighbouring country and are operating from Niger. Such a phenomenon is likely to lead to mistrust between different ethnic groups and end in armed insurrection (Crisis Group Report No. 301/Africa 2021). Besides, sitting bang in the middle of the Sahel, Niger is of great strategic value to the US and France to watch the developments in the North African countries and the Boko Haram in Nigeria (Nunbogu et al. 2018). Amid anti-France sentiment, as French and European troops were pulling out of Mali, the Nigerien government approved a parliamentary bill paving the way for the re-deployment of French counter-terrorism mission and European task force in Niger. Durmaz observed that after pulling out of Mali, Niger seems to have become the oasis of stability for the Western nations. Niger does provide a good opportunity for the West to push its economic interest and increase military footprints as Mali’s violence spreads to neighbouring Niger (Durmaz 2022). However, public demonstrations in Niger protesting the presence of French troops were held (Arslan 2022). On 22 December, at the behest of the new junta, France completed the withdrawal of its troops ending years long military support to Niger (Asadu 2023). The strategic location and rich mineral wealth are Niger’s strengths but the same strength combined with the threat of the spread of jihadi terrorism from neighbouring Mali makes it vulnerable. Niger is yet another example of international security and geoeconomics feeding on each other. As for Chad, the last remaining hope of Sahel is sitting on a knife edge. Within two years after succeeding his assassinated father, the current President Mahamat seems to have made enough enemies and there is a probability of a military coup. According to Hudson, “Chad’s collapse could open a bridge that merges the ﬂow of ﬁghters, weapons, and violence between these two regions embroiled in conﬂict: a virtual Pandora’s box (sic) clear across Africa” (Hudson 2023).

98 A. K. BARDALAI Central African Republic Conﬂict in the Central African Republic (CAR) is driven by greed and religious distrust. The security situation in CAR is as bad as in Mali if not worse. However, unlike Mali, where the conﬂict was because of discrim- ination, in CAR it is apparently because of control over rich mineral resources primarily by Muslim and non-Muslim groups (Bollen 2013). Ever since the country gained independence from France in 1960, the country was gripped by political instability and violence. But the current conﬂict is sectarian. In the civil war, Seleka, the Muslim majority force from the North, started ﬁghting the government forces led by Fran- cois Bozize who had come to power in a coup in 2003. The terms and conditions of the peace agreement between the two groups largely remained unfulﬁlled. In 2012, the Seleka began a rebellion, culminating in a coup. In response, another armed group the Christian-majority Anti- balaka was formed and the situation spiralled out of control throughout the country with the civilians paying the highest price. Seleka’s rebellion initially was not motivated by religion, but it seemed to have eventually turned that way. As reported, the Seleka rebellion was partially supported by foreign interests looking for CAR’s natural resources (Concern World Wide 2022). The former French colony has 470 minerals including diamond, ivory, oil, iron, manganese, uranium, rare timber, and many others. Despite being one of the poorest countries, CAR is known to have the world’s largest iron deposit, and diamonds account for half of the country’s export earnings. Impressed by India’s development and growth model, CAR has invited India to mine its natural resources. CAR has presented an opportunity to India to exchange its technical know-how in exchange for CAR’s natural wealth. It is a win–win situation for both (Economic Times 2022). The initial rebellion by the Seleka, which began because of distrust, has now become a clash of religious faith and greed for natural wealth. A concerning trend in Africa is the active role of jihadi groups and the internationalisation of internal armed conﬂicts. The assassination attempt on the life of Nigerian President Muhammadu Buhari by Islamic State West Africa Province (ISWAP) on 29 December 2022 in Kogi State indi- cates the resurgence of Islamist militancy (Karr 2023a, b). Over the last decade, the region which produces 55% of global mineral resources has become fertile terrain for geopolitical competition among great powers and for further penetration by middle powers (IISS 2022). For example,

6 ON THE GEOECONOMICS DRIVERS OF INTERNATIONAL … 99 China is expanding its military footprints in the Sahel by passing a law in 2015, for the overseas deployment of the PLA (Marshal 2021: 201– 235). As mentioned earlier and as reported by Karr, Russia uses the Wagner group and its partnerships with African nations to advance its strategic goals of countering Western inﬂuence and re-establishing Russia as a global power (Concern World Wide 2022; Central African Republic: Events of 2022;K a r r 2023a, b). The scramble for Africa is characterised by the rise of China; assertive Russia; and emerging powers including Turkey, Brazil, India, Israel, Gulf States, and others besides the tradi- tional powers on the continent including France, Britain, the US, and their allies. T he Middle East Whether it is Syria, Yemen, Turkey, Iraq, Iran, or even the constant state of conﬂict between Israel and Lebanon, the entire Middle East is so intrin- sically connected that even the smallest incident at the tactical level at any place has the potential to reverberate in escalating to a major conﬂict forcing even the powerful external powers to join (Phillips 2022). Tradi- tionally, the US has been the biggest role player in the Middle East. But during the war in Syria, Russia has spread its tentacles and now taking advantage of the squabble between Saudi Arabia and the US, China has stepped in too. The visit of Chinese President Xi Jinping to Saudi Arabia in December 2022 resulted in signing of agreements worth US$30 billion. Earlier, China had signed a 25-year-long strategic cooper- ation partnership with Iran in March 2021, which is estimated at around US$400 billion (Taneja 2022; Global Times 2022; Quamar 2022: 293– 306). Saudi Arabia, the world’s largest oil producer and the pillar of the petrodollar, is now open to discussion about trade in any currency. Pres- ident Xi’s visit to Saudi Arabia however created tension in Iran. But the recent visit of President Ebrahim Raisi of Iran to China to accelerate the 25-year-long strategic cooperation treaty is expected to smoothen up the rough patches in the bilateral relationship between China and Iran (Faucon 2023). The joint inﬂuence of Russia, China, and Saudi Arabia is going to impact the emergence of the new world in West Asia (Omar and Cranny 2023). The latest development can be a challenge to geoeconomic opportunities of the smaller grouping like the I2U2 (India- Israel-US-UAE), which came up post the pandemic (USIP 2022). It is however early to accurately predict its impact on the geopolitics of the

100 A. K. BARDALAI Middle East. Moreover, Iran’s application to join BRICS, its importance to China’s Belt and Road Initiative, and its Free Trade Agreements with Eurasia Economic Union and a few countries of Central Asia is something that needs to be watched out for and has attracted the attention of the West. Over the decades, since a permanent solution to the problems in the Middle East does not seem to be possible, even maintaining a status quo helps the powerful nations in their geopolitical manoeuvre in the region. Because, when a war like the one in Gaza breaks out, there can be dramatic changes in the geopolitics. Therefore, the Gaza War 2023 needs a special mention. Balancing geopolitical power is always in the national interest. It takes a lot of diplomatic jostling and does not happen overnight. Outbreak of a conﬂict however changes the trajectory and speed of the geopolitical shift, creating new diplomatic, commercial, and military alliances. On the one hand, there is destruction of life and property and a slump in the economy and there would be a beeline of a few to make a proﬁt from it on the other. The Gaza War that began with Hamas attacking Israel on 7 October 2023 and retaliation by Israel has already forced a great multitude of people to ﬂee their homes. According to a UN report, the domestic economy of the West Bank and Gaza has already shrunk by 4% and GDP is likely to drop by 12% worth 2 billion USD and there would be 61% job loss. By November 2023, more than 35,000 dwelling units were destroyed taking both the West Bank and Gaza back to the period of 2002 (Associated Press 2023; Al Jazeera 2023). Arms industry beneﬁts from the war economy. Hartung calls these ‘merchants of death’ and ‘war proﬁteers’. The country that makes the best out of it is the US. According to him, the American arms industry already staggeringly dominates the international market, controlling 45% of global arms sales, which is only likely to grow more in the context of the ongoing wars (Hartung 2023; Wezeman et al. 2023;B u t l e r 2023). Lipton pointed out that “[T]he conﬂict between Israel and Hamas is just the latest impetus behind a boom in international arms sales that is bolstering proﬁts and weapons-making capacity among American suppli- ers” (Lipton 2023). According to a survey by the American Friends Service Committee, there are at least 20 companies that have provided Israel with arms and other military equipment for its ‘Sword of Iron’ operation to attack Gaza, the West Bank, Syria and South Lebanon from October to December 2023. The list of the companies includes at least 18 US, two Israeli and one Japanese company (American Friends Service

6 ON THE GEOECONOMICS DRIVERS OF INTERNATIONAL … 101 Committee 2023; GV Wire 2023). Elbit System, an Israeli arms manu- facturing company, has produced a new precision-guided 120 mm mortar that killed hundreds of civilians in Gaza and will have a good global market (Al Jazeera 2023). As the war continues and there is no sign of any reprieve other than the temporary humanitarian pause, despite the Security Council Resolution 2728 (2024) demanding immidiate cease- ﬁre, Gaza will remain an open ﬁeld for competition for those who want to proﬁt from the crisis and feast on the suffering of innocent lives (Cordesman 2023). Ukraine Russia invaded Ukraine on 22 February 2022. This war could have been avoided. Ukraine is Russia’s red line, and this line was crossed on 21 February 2021 when Medvedchuk, the Chairman of Ukraine’s largest opposition group, was placed under house arrest, his assets seized, and his media channel banned (Shuster 2022). There was one year from then until the actual invasion on 24 February 2022 for the international community to step in and address the security concerns of Russia as well as assure Ukraine of the inviolability of its sovereignty. The assistance that has come to Ukraine is not free. The poor civilians have already paid with their lives and the worst is yet to come. This war did not begin because of economics but of security. That Ukraine is Russia’s red line is not a new input. Costigliola, the author of Kenann: A Life between the World mentioned that George Kennan, the US diplomat, and observer of the Soviet Union predicted as early as 1948 that Russia would never accept Ukraine’s independence (Costigliola 2023). All the information was available, but the current leadership ignored the prediction and recommendations of Kennan, who doubted if Russia would believe that NATO expansion towards the Russian border, would have no military connotation. Was it by design? Interestingly, the world’s arms industry has already thrived in the Ukraine war (Fig. 6.1). Quoting leading Western media, Chaudhury reported that EU ofﬁcials are upset and alleged that the US is making a fortune out of the war. Phillips also observed that the US defence contractors are expected to be the biggest beneﬁciary (Roy Chaudhury 2022; Phillips 2022). The grain deal and Nord Stream are good examples of the inter- play between security and geoeconomics. Russia’s consent to the Ukraine grain deal is not on humanitarian grounds but to seek opportunities to use

102 A. K. BARDALAI Fig. 6.1 Source SIPRI arms industry database, December 2022 it to advance Russian interests. Apart from exporting Russian grain, Russia hopes that because of the war-induced energy crisis, demand for Russian grain will only increase (Zolotova 2022). There are also speculations about Russia taking advantage of the damage to Nord Stream 1&2 which was leaked on 26 September 2022. Nord Stream 1 is around a 1222-km- long oil pipeline from St Petersburg via the Baltic Sea to north-eastern Germany and Nord Stream 2 was under construction. Russia fulﬁls almost 40% of the gas requirement of Europe. When the pipelines were damaged, there was speculation on who could be behind the sabotage. While the European leaders blame Russia for causing deliberate leaks, Russia blames the West (BBC News 2022; Gronholt-Pedersen and Pouche 2022). Since both lines were not running to their full capacity at the time of the blast, and most European nations were building up their gas storage, the immediate impact of the damage was not much. But the long-term consequences of the sabotage will be more for Russia, for which oil is a

6 ON THE GEOECONOMICS DRIVERS OF INTERNATIONAL … 103 political weapon too. Although Russia is turning east, the Asian market may not be good enough for Russia to compensate for the loss of the European market. Therefore, why should Russia sabotage the pipeline? According to Seymour Hersh, since Europe is dependent on cheap oil from Russia, depriving Russia of its political weapon will force Europe to support Ukraine. Therefore, a plan to sabotage Nord Stream 1 and Nord Stream 2 was hatched in the US in December 2021 two months before Russia invaded Ukraine (Hersh 2023). Meanwhile, President Putin has offered gas to Europe through an intact stretch of Nord Stream 2 and suggested an alternative through Turkey, which would become a gas hub (Nakhle 2022). Referring to the global impact of the war on international politics, Greminger and Mussa mentioned that the war has had signiﬁcant global repercussions on many states, their citizens, and regional and international politics. They observed that Latin America and the Caribbean region are feeling the heat of dire economic consequences. The war has helped China, Iran, and Azerbaijan reorient their regional roles, and the Euro- pean Union and the US are repositioning security and internal affairs (Greminger and Mussa 2022). Despite the loss of lives and destruc- tion, the Ukraine war has become an opportunity for political gain and economic beneﬁt which does not exclude India. For example, India is buying oil at cheaper rates from Russia. In the words of External Affairs Minister S Jaishankar in the Rajya Sabha, “We buy oil from multiple sources, but it is a sensible policy to go where we get the best deal in the interests of the Indian people” (Outlook 2023). Similarly, Verma reported that the “Russian oil sold to India below price cap in buyers’ market” (Verma 2022). Th e C a u c a s u s Nagorno-Karabakh was established as an autonomous region by the then Soviet Republic in 1923—home to a 95% ethnic Armenian population within the Azerbaijan Soviet Socialist Republic. Post-Nagorno-Karabakh’s ofﬁcial declaration to join Armenia in 1988, there were sporadic armed conﬂicts between both republics but were kept under control by the Soviet Union. However, after the Soviet Union collapsed in 1991, and both Armenia and Azerbaijan achieved statehood, war erupted over control of the autonomous region. Nagorno-Karabakh declared its inde- pendence in 1991 soon after the dissolution of the Soviet Union and

104 A. K. BARDALAI Armenia took 20% of the region in 1994. The recent conﬂict between Armenia and Azerbaijan on 13 September 2022 over the control of Nagorno-Karabakh is the third one after 2020 (CPA 2023). As observed by Glantz, the latest offensive was triggered by Azerbaijan when Russia is bogged down in Ukraine (Glantz 2022). Russia’s inva- sion of Ukraine has impacted the power balance in Central Asia. For quite some time, many Central Asian nations have wanted to diversify their trade and decrease their dependence on Russia. Russia would like to retain its geopolitical inﬂuence in the South Caucasus by maintaining the status quo in the conﬂict and playing the role of the mediator. From the Western perspective, recent events in Ukraine and sanctions against Russia allow for more active involvement of the Western countries in the resolution of the Nagorno-Karabakh conﬂict. The European Union has been mediating for quite some time to ﬁnd a peaceful solution to the problem—the dispute over ownership of the autonomous region. The EU has agreed to deploy 100 unarmed observers along with Russian peacekeepers (Krivoshee 2023; Kommersant 2023). It helps the West to decrease its energy dependence on Russia by implementing Caspian energy projects with the participation of Azerbaijan (European Policy Centre n.d.). Meanwhile, reportedly, Kazakhstan received verbal conﬁr- mation from Russia to export 20,000 tons of oil to Germany through the Russian Druzhba pipeline (Erozbek 2023). With 80% of Kazak oil ﬂowing to the Russian port Novorossiysk, Russia still exercises leverage over the export of oil from Kazakhstan (Merkel 2023). The Central Asian countries are trying to diversify their trade while others are looking at the current crisis as a source of economic beneﬁt. For example, Turkey has offered to build a new pipeline to carry oil from Turkmenistan and Azerbaijan to Europe (Soylu 2022). Currently, after the September 2023 offensive, Azerbaijan has taken full control of the Nagorno-Karabakh region from the ethnic Armenians. Control of the area is likely to alter the power dynamics in the South Caucasus which lies at the crossroads of geopolitical interests of Russia, Turkey, and Western nations (Bigg and Nechepurenko 2023). Being a close ally of NATO member state, Turkey, Azerbaijan’s gas (Azerbaijan is a signiﬁcant natural gas producer) helps to feed the energy needs of Europe. Reuters reported that after the fall of the Nagorno-Karabakh, the long-standing proposal for the construction of a pipeline from Baku to Tbilisi via the southern

6 ON THE GEOECONOMICS DRIVERS OF INTERNATIONAL … 105 Armenian territory as part of the peace treaty has become a reality (Azer- baijan drops Armenian land corridor plan, look to Iran—Aliyev adviser. 2023). Ta i wa n For now, Taiwan is not at war, but it is a potential area for another war because China’s invasion of the island cannot be ruled out. After all, the international community failed to prevent the invasion of Ukraine. Besides, Taiwan is not Ukraine to be able to stand up to a military inva- sion by China. Preparing for that day, Taiwan has increased its defence budget by 14% (reaching 19.4 billion and 2.4% of its GDP). After the meeting between President Biden and the Chinese President, Taiwan has got a few more years of breathing time. As reported, 42% of Taiwan’s total export in 2021 was to mainland China and Hong Kong and 22% of total import in the same year was from mainland China and Hong Kong. Besides, many Taiwan-based high-tech companies in chip manu- facturing are operating their factories in China. Despite China’s military and economic pressure, Taiwan depends more on China for trade than on the US (Cheng 2022; Kucharski 2022; Zhang 2022; Dabbar 2023). Since Taiwan imports all its fuel to power its economy, it is unusually vulner- able to energy risk markets. Taiwan’s continued prosperity depends on a stable geopolitical environment (Feigenbaum and Hou 2020). Therefore, while economic interest can be a big driving factor for either initiation or continuation of the conﬂict, in the case of a war between China and Taiwan, geoeconomics can be a restraining factor. Conclusion The intricate relationship between war and economics is unquestionable. Traditionally, countries have gone to war to expand their control over other territories and collect wealth. But the inter se position of the war and economy is interchangeable as both feed on each other. In Africa, the availability of the rich natural wealth brought the countries under colo- nial rule. After decolonisation, the craving for natural resources remained, leading to several intra-state conﬂicts. In DRC, the Eastern region is the most contested between DRC and Rwanda-backed M23 rebels. In South Sudan, control of natural wealth has become the driving factor in the

106 A. K. BARDALAI inﬁghting among different communities. Besides, like other African coun- tries that are in conﬂict, the leaders of the two main political parties of South Sudan have already amassed a lot of wealth for themselves. The Sahel region is amid conﬂict because of several factors. In Mali, the rebel movement began because of discrimination and oppression. Since the country has the potential for rich mineral wealth, the conﬂict will soon take a different turn. Central African Republic, which is known for its rich diamonds, gold, oil and uranium, is in the middle of conﬂict between Muslim and non-Muslim groups. Strategically located Niger is yet another example of international security and geoeconomics feeding into each other. As for Chad, the only remaining hope in the Sahel is sitting on the edge of a knife. The Middle East is the gateway to Europe. Its strategic location and pool of oil as well as the dynamic of the ever-changing inter-state rela- tionship draw the powerful nations closer. Even a minor conﬂict unless controlled can easily spiral out of control resulting in a regional war and possibly the next world war. In the name of stability, the rich Western countries always beneﬁtted from the region’s inﬁghting with a boost to their arms industry. Ukraine’s war that began because of security reasons is an avenue for political and economic gain. Even though it has temporarily moved outside the world’s radar because of the Gaza War, huge damage has been already done. The global impact of the regressing economy has affected Latin American countries and the Caribbean region the most. While thou- sands of innocent civilians have died, US defence contractors have made a fortune out of the war. In the Caucus region, the control of Nagorno-Karabakh by Azerbaijan has altered the power dynamics of the region and side by side it has helped Europe to ﬁll its energy appetite through the new energy corridor. The case of Taiwan is slightly different. Being an emotional issue, despite the odds, China’s invasion of Taiwan remains a possibility. However, because of interdependence on each other for economic growth (Taiwan is more dependent on China for energy than the US), geoeconomics is the restraining factor for the likelihood of China going to war against Taiwan. Ideally no nation would like to ﬁght a war but once drawn into it, war becomes the means for political gain and economic beneﬁts. When conﬂict is internationalised, international security and geoeconomics become inseparable. The relationship between international security and

6 ON THE GEOECONOMICS DRIVERS OF INTERNATIONAL … 107 geoeconomics is dynamic. Depending on the strategic interest of a nation, both change their positions between the locomotive and the cart. Far away from home, economic interest takes the lead. Closer home, security becomes the primary driver with economic interest in a support role. In war, there will be loss of life and destruction but it is also an opportunity for political gain and economic beneﬁt. For instance, in one of the latest examples, analysts felt that when Syrian President Assad allowed foreign aid workers to enter the rebel-held areas post the devastating earth- quake in February 2023, either he was expecting something in return, or there was a deal behind the scenes (Perry et al. 2023). Therefore, where there are conﬂicts, there are opportunities and, as mentioned in Caldwell ( 1972), the politicians and businessmen proﬁt the most from a crisis. References Arslan, E.F. 2022. Protesters in Niger call for the departure of French troops, Anadolu Agency, September 19, https://www.aa.com.tr/en/africa/protes ters-in-niger-call-for-departure-of-french-troops/2688363. Asadu, C. 2023. France completes military withdrawal from Niger, leaving a gap in the terror ﬁght in the Sahel, AP News, December 23, https://apn ews.com/article/niger-france-sahel-coup-troops-security-macron-97c8ccfe8 80169832965c33e96d7befe?utm_source=copy&utm_medium=share. Azerbaijan drops Armenian land corridor plan, look to Iran—Aliyev adviser. 2023. Reuters, October 25, https://www.reuters.com/world/asia-paciﬁc/ armenia-says-pashinyan-aliyev-talks-cancelled-after-baku-pulled-out-tass-2023- 10-25/. Bigg, M.M., and I. Nechepurenko. 2023, September 28. Understanding the dispute between Armenia and Azerbaijan. The New Y ork Times, , https:// www.nytimes.com/article/armenia-azerbaijan-clashes.html?smid=url-share. Bollen, A. 2013, December 18. Natural resources at the heart of CAR crisis. New Internationalist, https://newint.org/blog/2013/12/18/central-african-rep ublic-natural-resources. Butler, J. 2023, November 16. Up in arms. London Review of Books 45(22). https://www.lrb.co.uk/the-paper/v45/n22/james-butler/up-in-arms. Caldwell, T. 1972. Captains and the kings. Fawcett. Central African Republic: Events of 2022. Human rights watch, https://www. hrw.org/world-report/2022/country-chapters/central-african-republic. Cheng, E. 2022, August 4. Taiwan’s trade with China is far bigger than its trade with the U.S., CNBC, https://www.cnbc.com/2022/08/05/taiwans-trade- with-china-is-far-bigger-than-its-trade-with-the-us.html.

108 A. K. BARDALAI Conﬂicts to Watch in 2023. 2023, January 1. Crisis group commentary/global. https://www.crisisgroup.org/global/10-conﬂicts-watch-2023. Cordesman, H.A. 2023, November 2. Gaza: Why the war won’t end. Centre for Strategic and International Studies. https://www.csis.org/analysis/gaza-why- war-wont-endN. Costigliola, F. 2023, January 27. Kennan’s warning on Ukraine ambition, inse- curity, and the perils of independence. Foreign Affairs. https://www.foreignaf fairs.com/ukraine/george-kennan-warning-on-ukraine. Dabbar, M.P . 2023, January 25. Potential energy challenges from a China- Taiwan conﬂict scenario. Centre on Global Energy Policy. https://www.energy policy.columbia.edu/publications/potential-energy-challenges-from-a-china- taiwan-conﬂict-scenario/. Dallaire, R. 2003. Shake hands with the devil. Random House. Deﬁning the Caspian Project. n.d. European Policy Centre. https://www.epc. eu/en/closed-projects/Defining-the-Caspian-Project~10e050. Durmaz, M. 2022, May 9. Analysis: Can Niger become the main Western ally in the Sahel?, Al Jazeera. https://www.aljazeera.com/features/2022/5/9/ana lysis-can-niger-become-the-main-western-ally-in-the-sahel. Erozbek, D. n.d. Kazakhstan received verbal conﬁrmation from Russia to export 20 thousand tons of oil to Germany. Kommersant, https://www.kommersant. ru/doc/5760114. European observers will keep an eye on Armenia. 2023, January 23. Kommer- sant. Faucon, B., A. Ramzy, and R. Huang. 2023, February 14. Iran’s President Visits China Amid Tensions with US. The Wall Street Journal. https://www.wsj.com/articles/irans-president-visits-china-amid-ten sions-with-u-s-abf67525?utm_source=dailybrief&utm. Feigenbaum, A.E., and Y.J. Hou. 2020, April 27. Overcoming Taiwan’s energy Trilemma. Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. https://carnegiee ndowment.org/2020/04/27/overcoming-taiwan-s-energy-trilemma-pub- 81645. Gavin, M. 2023, December 12. The democratic Republic of Congo holds tense elections: What to know. Council on Foreign Relations. https://on.cfr.org/ 3TtNUBs. Glantz, M. 2022, September 15. Amid Ukraine war, Armenia and Azerbaijan ﬁghting risks broader conﬂict. United States Institute of Peace. https://www.usip.org/publications/2022/09/amid-ukraine-war-arm enia-and-azerbaijan-ﬁghting-risks-broader-conﬂict. Greminger T., and M. Mussa. 2022, December 1. Global repercussions of the war in Ukraine, Geneva Centre for Security Policy. https://www.gcsp.ch/pub lications/global-repercussions-war-ukraine.

6 ON THE GEOECONOMICS DRIVERS OF INTERNATIONAL … 109 Hartung, D.W. 2023, November 23. The devastating wars abroad are windfalls for weapons manufacturers. The Nation. https://www.thenation.com/article/ world/military-industrial-complex-ukraine-gaza/. Hersh, S. 2023, February 8. How America took out the nord stream pipeline. https://seymourhersh.substack.com/p/how-america-took-out-the- nord-stream GSP Hub. n.d. https://gsphub.eu/country-info/Democratic%20Republic% 20of%20Congo. Hudson, C. 2023, December 6. Chad: The Sahel’s last domino to fall. Centre for Strategic and International Studies. https://www.csis.org/analysis/chad- sahels-last-domino-fall. Irwin-Hunt, A., and Makoni, M. 2022, October 31. The promise of oil and gas in South Sudan. fdi intelligence. https://www.fdiintelligence.com/content/ feature/the-promise-of-oil-and-gas-in-south-sudan-81521. Karr, L. 2023, January 5. The Africa File is an analysis and assessment of the Salaﬁ-jihadi movement in Africa and related security and political dynamics. Critical Threats: Africa File. https://www.criticalthreats.org/briefs/africa- ﬁle/africa-ﬁle-islamic-state-affiliate-attempts-to-assassinate-nigerian-president. Karr, L. 2023, February 1. Africa File: Wagner group in Burkina Faso will help the kremlin and hurt counterterrorism. Critical Threats: Africa File. https://www.criticalthreats.org/briefs/africa-ﬁle/africa-ﬁle-wag ner-group-in-burkina-faso-will-help-the-kremlin-and-hurt-counterterrorism? Krivoshee, K. 2023, February 16. Could the new EU mission Sideline Russia in Armenia-Azerbaijan settlement? Carnegie Endowment. https://carnegieendo wment.org/politika/89060?utm_source=ctw&utm_medium=email&utm_ campaign=buttonlink&mkt_tok. Kucharski, J. 2022, September 13. Taiwan’s greatest vulnerability is its energy supply. The Diplomat. https://thediplomat.com/2022/09/taiwans-greatest- vulnerability-is-its-energy-supply/. Lipton, E. 2023, October 17. Middle East War Adds to Surge in international arms sales. The New Y ork Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2023/10/17/ us/politics/israel-gaza-global-arms-sales.html. Marshal, T. 2021. The power of geography. Elliot and Thompson. Merkel, A.D. 2023, February 3. Putin and Tokayev: Russia-Kazakhstan relations in 11 meetings. Geopolitical Monitor. https://www.geopoliticalmonitor.com/ putin-and-tokayev-russia-kazakhstan-relations-in-11-meetings/. Nakhle, C. 2022, December 23. Europe and Russia without Nord Stream. GIS, https://www.gisreportsonline.com/r/russia-without-nord-stream/. Nord Stream 1: How Russia is cutting gas supplies to Europe. 2022, September 29. BBC news. https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-60131520. Nunbogu, M.A., M. Kala, and A.K. Mensah. 2018. Niger: Mineral policy. Encyclopaedia of Mineral and Energy Policy. Springer.

110 A. K. BARDALAI Omar A.A., and M. Cranny. 2023, January 17. Saudi Arabia says open to settling trade in other currencies. Bloomberg. https://www.bloomberg.com/ news/articles/2023-01-17/saudi-arabia-open-to-talks-on-trade-in-currencies- besides-dollar#xj4y7vzkg. Pedersen, G.J., and G. Fouche. 2022, November 6. Dark arctic: NATO allies wake up to Russian supremacy in the region. Reuters. https://www.reuters. com/graphics/ARCTIC-SECURITY/zgvobmblrpd/index.html?utm_source. Perry, T., Ghantous, G., and Bassam, L. 2023, February 14. Analysis: After allowing quake aid routes, Syria’s Assad may expect reward. Reuters. https://www.reuters.com/world/middle-east/after-allowing-quake- aid-routes-syrias-assad-may-expect-reward-2023-02-14/. Phillips, L. D. 2022, December 11. Turkish aggression in Syria Is a gift to ISIS. The National Interest. https://nationalinterest.org/feature/turkish-agg ression-syria-gift-isis-206007. Phillips, A. 2022, June 10. Ukraine war: How weapons makers are proﬁting from the conﬂict. Sky News. https://news.sky.com/story/ukraine-war-how- weapons-makers-are-proﬁting-from-the-conﬂict-12624574. The Companies Proﬁting from Israel’s 2023 Attack on Gaza. n.d. American Friends Service Committee, https://afsc.org/companies-behind-2023-attack- gaza. Quamar, M.M. 2022. Saudi Arabia’s strategic partnership with the United States: Fraying at the margins? Strategic Analysis 46 (3): 293–306. https://doi.org/ 10.1080/09700161.2022.2081437. Roberts, A., H.C. Moraes, and V. Ferguson. 2018, November 27. Geoe- conomics: The variable relationship between economics and security. LA WFARE. Roy Chaudhury, D. 2022, December 18. European ofﬁcials accuse US for making proﬁts from Ukraine war. The Economic Times. https:// economictimes.indiatimes./news/international/world-news/european- ofﬁcials-accuse-usa-of-making-proﬁts-from-ukraine-wararticleshow/ 96322781.cms. Russia Is India’s Top Oil Supplier for Second Month in A Row, EAM Jaishankar Says, Sensible Policy to Buy Oil at Best Deal. 2023, February 4. Outlook. https://www.outlookindia.com/international/russia-is-india-s-top-oil-sup plier-for-second-month-in-a-row-eam-jaishankar-says-sensible-policy-to-buy- oil-at-best-deal--news-244052 Rwanda, Congo and Uganda: The Cursed Border. 2023. Information brokers international. https://ibiworld.eu/en/rwanda-congo-and-uganda- the-cursed-border/. The Sabotage of Nord Stream 1 & 2. 2022, October 10. The institute for security and development policy. https://isdp.eu/the-sabotage-of-nord-stream-1-2/.

6 ON THE GEOECONOMICS DRIVERS OF INTERNATIONAL … 111 Shuster, S. 2022. Great wars sometimes start over small offences. Time 199 (5–6): 14–22. South Sudan Oil and Gas Market—Growth, Trends, Covid-19 Impact, and Fore- casts (2023–2028). 2023. Mordor intelligence. https://www.mordorintellige nce.com/industry-reports/south-sudan-oil-and-gas-market . South-western Niger: Preventing a new Insurrection. 2021, April 29. Crisis Group Report No. 301/Africa. https://www.crisisgroup.org/africa/sahel/ niger/301-sud-ouest-du-niger-prevenir-un-nouveau-front-insurrectionnel. Soylu, R. 2022. Turkey may build a gas pipeline from Turkmenistan and Azer- baijan to Europe. Middle East Eye. https://www.middleeasteye.net/news/tur key-turkmenistan-azerbaijan-gas-europe-new-pipeline. Taneja, K. 2022. Saudi Arabia pushes further for strategic autonomy with Xi Jinping’s visit. Observer Research Foundation. https://www.orfonline.org/ expert-speak/saudi-arabia-pushes-further-for-strategic-autonomy-with-xi-jin pings-visit/. The Central African Republic Crisis, Explained. 2022, April 25. Concern world wide. https://www.hrw.org/world-report/2022/country-chapters/cen tral-african-republic. Global Times. 2022, December 8. https://www.globaltimes.cn/page/202212/ 1281416.shtml. Global Times. n.d. https://www.globaltimes.cn/page/202110/1236425.shtml. International Trade Administration, U.S. Department of Commerce. 2022. Mali—Country Commercial Guide. https://www.trade.gov/country-commer cial-guides/mali-mining. UN Report Outlines War’s Devastating Impact on Palestinian Economy. 2023, November 9. Associated press. https://www.voanews.com/a/un-report-out lines-war-s-devastating-impact-on-palestinian-economy-/7349403.html. Verma, N. 2022, December 14. Exclusive: Russian oil sold to India below price cap in buyers’ market. Reuters. https://www.reuters.com/business/energy/ russian-oil-sold-india-below-price-cap-buyers-market-2022-12-14/. War Crimes should not pay: Stopping the looting and destruction of South Sudan. 2016, September. The sentry. https://thesentry.org/wp-content/upl oads/2016/09/Sentry_WCSP_Finalx.pdf. Wezeman, D. P ., J. Gadon, and Wezeman, T. S. 2023, March. Trends in international arms transfers, 2022. SIPRI. https://doi.org/10.55163/CPN S8443. What You Need to Know About the I2U2. 2022, July 28. United States Institute for Peace. https://www.usip.org/publications/2022/07/what-you- need-know-about-i2u2.

112 A. K. BARDALAI What’s the impact of the war on Gaza on the Palestinian economy? 2023, November 18. Al Jazeera. https://www.aljazeera.com/program/counting- the-cost/2023/11/18/whats-the-impact-of-the-war-on-gaza-on-palestinian- economy. Zhang, J. 2022, November 16. Can the U.S. and Taiwan avoid a war with China? GIS. https://www.gisreportsonline.com/r/china-taiwan-war/. Zolotova, E. 2022, November 21. Russia’s long game on grain exports. Geopolit- ical Affairs. https://geopoliticalfutures.com/russias-long-game-on-grain-exp orts/?tpa.

CHAPTER 7 International Diplomacy in the Era of Permacrisis: Competing Worldviews Supreeta Mehta The world did not have a chance to settle down properly after the end of the Cold War. From genocide in one part of the world to the countries ﬁrst experiencing globalisation, liberalisation, and privatisation, on the other end, the world has been in upheaval at each moment in time after the 1990s. Increased acceptance of globalisation, the spread of the market economy and subsequent economic opportunities, and the technological revolution led to two things: interconnectedness and emergence of non- traditional challenges. As multilateral institutions increased in number, the slogans for inclusivity were heard louder. Most interestingly, we witness a divergence of interests and opinions in the West, which has called the efﬁcacy of the Western-created and Western-led international institutions into question. From a ﬁnancial crisis to invasions, to massive migration inﬂux, to a pandemic, and now a war, the West has faced one blow after another while the developing world deals with its own political, social, S. Mehta (B) Khudiram Bose Central College, University of Calcutta, Kolkata, India e-mail: supreetamehta19@gmail.com © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapor e Pte Ltd. 2024 O. Mishra and S. Sen (eds.), Global Political Economy, Geopolitics and International Security , https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-97-2231-0_7 113

114 S. MEHTA and economic challenges as regional power centres emerge, ﬁghting for inﬂuence, and nationalistic sentiments running high at home. The Collins Dictionary Word of the Year, ‘permacrisis’, sums up the situation in international relations, where the world is going through one crisis after another (Shariatmadari 2022). Although they referred particu- larly to the crises that Europe is lurching from one to the other, it cannot be denied that a similar situation has enveloped international politics. The pandemic revealed how easily a virus can interrupt the day-to-day func- tioning of the entire world, as well as the potential of the same world, particularly some countries, to jump back up and ‘re-normalise’ the situ- ation. At the same time, the recurrent crises at the global level are posing signiﬁcant challenges for peace and security in the world. To put it simply, permacrisis refers to a set of circumstances in global politics that are deﬁned by recurring conﬂicts of varied nature without any end to them in sight. In other words, such a situation brings about a deep sense of instability and volatility in international relations. How did we arrive at this destination? The answer to this is even more complex and truthfully quite predictable when one looks at the recent history of international politics. The complexity of the matter at hand owes itself to the proliferation of philosophies and technologies, emanating from the Western liberal world order. The predictability of the present situation can be ascertained from the way power politics has played out since the latter half of the twentieth century, or even before that. One detail, however, that is highly characteristic of the current situation of permacrisis is that countries are no longer blindly forming themselves into camps. Instead, countries are carefully choosing their stances and strictly avoiding forming any enmities, unless there is an overwhelming political/security threat. The two distinct worldviews that existed during the period of the Cold War, as well as a non-aligned third, is a feature of a bygone era. This in turn is due to the overarching interconnectedness in the world today. It is a vicious circle. Competing worldviews, including multiple distinct strategies of the West, are perhaps the most important attributes of this situation of permacrisis. The present chapter seeks to explain the current environment of permacrisis through two examples, the Russia-Ukraine war and the conﬂictual situation in the Indo-Paciﬁc region. It also incorporates an understanding of how India deals with these same situations via its foreign policy standing and policies, to provide an angle of how developing

7 INTERNATIONAL DIPLOMACY IN THE ERA … 115 regional powers are responding to global politics in turmoil. The contri- bution discusses how there is essentially a transition in the world order itself and how the liberal international system is falling short of the requirements of the time. That along with the world being interconnected closely has called for a look outside Western security arrangements. The Russia-Ukraine war and the crisis in the Indo-Paciﬁc are two such conﬂicts that reveal the problems and challenges of current international politics, the response by the West, and the attitude of the developing countries/emerging powers to the same. This essentially brings out the points of divergence and the variations that have occurred in the global regimes of developed and developing countries. They also demonstrate how present disputes tend to be intractable and long-term in nature. Due to the interdependence in the world and the recurring nature of conﬂicts, that have been given the nomenclature of permacrisis, navi- gating multilateralism has become a complex task. It calls the Western-led and Western-created liberal order into question and presents multiple, competing worldviews. Although problems of terrorism, climate change, health-related crises, and migration have not been discussed in the present endeavour, they offer another angle of the present situation of permacrisis. These issues are more global in nature yet they provide deeper insights into domestic politics and opinions rather than international relations. However, it is outside the scope of this contribution to discuss these and as such we limit our focus on two exclusive geopolitical and geoeconomic discords of this decade. T he Russia-Ukraine War: V aried Responses Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and the consequent war has emerged as the most deﬁning conﬂict of the current times. It is also representative of and exempliﬁes the present environment of permacrisis in international rela- tions. In February 2022, Russia launched a full-scale invasion of Ukraine, after having sent some of its troops to Donetsk and Luhansk regions, which had broken away from Ukraine just a month before, to quell unrest. The invasion shocked the world, as some of the major interna- tional players came forward to condemn this act of aggression. One year later and Russia-Ukraine war continues to persist, in what seems to be another protracted conﬂict of the present times. The reasons for the inva- sion, the judgement on who is right and who is wrong, the historical events that have led up to this, and decisions taken by a myriad of state

116 S. MEHTA actors are factors that are out of the scope of the present chapter, as it does not further its objective. The pertinent considerations, however, are the global spill-over effects of the Russia-Ukraine war, in general, and partic- ularly on India’s political and economic situations, and what the conﬂict portrays about the present world order. The two most obvious impacts that stand out are political and economic in nature. Politically, Russia has received a massive barrage of criticism that is not mere rhetoric but also solidiﬁed by sanctions from some of the leading power centres. The United States came out as the biggest critic of Russia, along with several countries from the liberal-democratic political order. India, while not supporting the inva- sion, and maintaining that conﬂicts are best solved through dialogue, did not condemn, or vote against Russia on any international platforms. This is not exactly peculiar to Indian behaviour when it comes to sanctioning Russia’s acts of aggression. In a Lok Sabha session where a question was posed on the impact of the Russia-Ukraine war on India, in March 2022, the Minister of State in the Ministry of External Affairs, Smt. Meenakashi Lekhi stated: We have expressed deep concern at the worsening situation and called for immediate cessation of violence and end to all hostilities. Our state- ments at the Security Council and General Assembly have urged an urgent ceaseﬁre and ensuring safe passage for stranded civilians. We have also highlighted the humanitarian assistance extended by India to Ukraine and its neighbours at this hour of crisis … there is no choice but diplomacy and dialogue. We have emphasised … that the global order is anchored in international law, UN Charter, and respect for territorial integrity and sovereignty of states (Question No.3771 Impact of Russia-Ukraine War on India n.d.). On previous occasions, during the height of the Cold War, India had refrained from censuring Russian acts of aggression in Hungary (1956), Czechoslovakia (1968), and even when it invaded Afghanistan in 1979. For India, certain strategic reasons have pushed it to take the stance. Primarily, India does not want to sanction or cut off relations with Russia, as the countries of the Western liberal-democratic order have, and push it towards China as the only alternative and as a result further strengthening their relations (Tellis 2022). Geopolitical threats that India faces from China and Pakistan are quite real and India does not want Russia to be pushed towards that axis, even more so when Russia shares good relations

7 INTERNATIONAL DIPLOMACY IN THE ERA … 117 with China and Pakistan. So, while India is a democracy and supports a liberal-democratic order, it is the geographical proximity of political and security threats that has shaped India’s stance towards the war situation. India’s past and present foreign secretaries and diplomats have maintained time and again that India is not and will never be part of any military alliance. When it comes to international events, India perceives them and then makes a decision that is best suited to its interests (India’s Response to Russia’s War in Ukraine 2022). It does not blindly support any narra- tive or is not part of any camp. Hence its worldview does not represent that of any bloc or camp and may even seem contradictory at any point in time. This stance may be seen as being pragmatic in positive connotations and displays an attitude of strategic ambivalence if considered negatively. The economic effect worldwide of any crisis during present times resembles a ripple. The highly integrated and interdependent nature of the world has manifested these circumstances. The Russia-Ukraine war has led to a stark rise in the price of crude oil (as the US and Europe placed bans on multiple industries of Russia), volatility in the stock market, peaked inﬂation in many economies, and increased prices in food products as supply chains was dealt a major blow. India too faced high inﬂation, growth in food prices, devaluation of the rupee, and stress on foreign reserves. Indian exports declined as trade declined in its major export destinations (US and Europe). However, India’s strong ﬁscal policy and the economic outlook it adopted, braving the challenges of the pandemic, enabled it to withstand serious damage (The Times of India 2023). However, India has also come out of this scenario as a winner of sorts or at least, accrued certain proﬁts for the country itself. The ban on Russian crude oil led to a decline in the prices, India saw an opportunity to buy crude oil at a cheap rate in massive volumes (The Times of India 2023) as Russia jumped positions to become one of the largest trading partners of India during this time. At present India and Russia are set to become signiﬁcant trade partners as both coun- tries have identiﬁed areas of complementarities and joint efforts, albeit, with necessary tweaks and adjustments (Kulik 2023). One of the major impacts of the war on the global economic order has been the large-scale damage done to supply chains. However, it would not be incorrect to mention that global supply chains have demon- strated the probability of disruption in the event of a crisis, even before the Russia-Ukraine war. One of the biggest exports to be affected by the war has been food and raw materials. Russia and Ukraine are the

118 S. MEHTA biggest exporters of grains, such as wheat and barley. While Russia has damaged agricultural infrastructure in Ukraine and has been sanctioned, the major source of food grain import–export has been disrupted, leading to an increase in food prices as demand continues to increase in the face of a shortage of supply. Developing countries in Asia and Africa have been particularly affected. The main resources whose interruption in supply has particularly affected the West are oil and natural gas. Energy resources, along with an interruption in the supply of crucial metals have also created hindrances in the infrastructure development in the US and Europe (Hamilton 2023). Supply routes between China and Europe, which became quite active during the coronavirus pandemic, have been jammed as Russia is part of the said route (Stackpole 2022). The signif- icance of the maintenance of ﬂexible, independent, and neutral supply chains has been exempliﬁed by the Russia-Ukraine war in particular and geopolitical crises in general. The nature of supply chains in most cases is such that there is multiples of them that source, reﬁne, modify, and then ﬁnally deliver them. Hence, if any one of the components faces disruption or hindrances, then the entire process gets hampered. Russia and Ukraine are some of the main exporters of wheat and barley. The war has not only created global food shortages but has also severely impacted the economies of both the countries involved in the war, partic- ularly Ukraine. Ukraine’s Black Sea port has been blockaded by Russia and the former faces the real possibility of severe economic vulnerability and a humanitarian crisis (Naz and Kear 2022). Even the COVID-19 crisis has revealed the dangers of and challenges to the global supply of resources. The steps taken then were disrupted once again by the next geopolitical crisis. The perception of this apparent trend of disrup- tions due to conﬂicts/calamities, the recurrence of these situations, and the identiﬁcation of resultant problems in international relations have prompted the need for solutions. Even before the pandemic, the United States followed by the United Kingdom, the European Union, Australia, and South Korea had introduced economic policy changes in the form of export control and screening of foreign direct investment processes. The focus of these countries has also been the advancement of tech- nological processes in artiﬁcial intelligence, biotechnology, and the like (Goodman, Reynolds, and Fittipaldi 2022). Subsequently, these countries are looking at emerging economies for alternative supply chain routes, which in turn beneﬁt the latter as they seek to enhance their national political, economic, and strategic power.

7 INTERNATIONAL DIPLOMACY IN THE ERA … 119 Hence, just like the political order, the global economic order is also demonstrating a situation of ﬂux and transition. One of the answers to the complications of over-dependence and interconnectedness of global economies, during times of crises, has been to look inward. In other words, the ideas of self-reliance and sustainability have gathered momentum. However, there still need to be solutions to the system of transportation of resources that are already in place. Moreover, not all countries are equipped to sustain themselves on the basis of self-reliance alone. Thus, while certain established powers are facing setbacks, espe- cially European countries, the same situation has presented itself as an opportunity for others. The Western countries have well-developed supply routes, much wealthier economies, and technologically advanced indus- trialised zones, while developing countries fall short in these aspects. Moreover, the developing countries also require well-established and larger production capabilities and increased levels of foreign investments. A strong and stable government, with a healthy culture and environ- ment are prerequisite to gain global economic heft. Thus, emerging centres of power like India, Vietnam, Indonesia, and some others are now rapidly transforming themselves into potential manufacturing hubs and presenting alternative supply routes. China has already developed alternative trade routes to quite an extent (the Belt and Road Initiative was launched in 2013) as a substitute and set up banks like the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) as another substitute to existing international ﬁnancial institutions. This is China’s strategy to counter Western ﬁnancial inﬂuence. However, during COVID-19, the world lost faith and started searching for a replacement for Chinese trade, goods, and supply chains, hence now we are witnessing the rise of potential supply chain routes in emerging economies like India. The ‘Make in India’ scheme (2014) and the ‘Self-Reliant India Scheme’ (2020) are examples of India trying to transform itself as a manufacturing hub. Furthermore, India is working multilaterally to diversify and strengthen new supply chain systems like the ‘Supply Chain Resilience Initiative’ with Australia and Japan (Goodman, Reynolds, and Fittipaldi 2022). Thus, we are now looking at an international economic order that is not exclusive to Western dominance. While there are at least a couple of major economic powers, regional economic power centres are also evolving and making their marks on global economic trends.

120 S. MEHTA Politics in the Indo-Pacific: T he Eye of the Storm The region of the Indo-Paciﬁc has emerged as an area of crucial strategic importance in international relations today. In terms of the current global political and economic order, which is in a state of ﬂux and transfor- mation, the Indo-Paciﬁc represents an arena where major and emerging powers are set to converge. The obvious competition is between the US and China. The former is trying to hold on to and increase its sway and weight in the region while the latter wants to create its alternate insti- tutions and is aggressively and proactively taking steps to establish its authority in the Indo-Paciﬁc. The Indo-Paciﬁc region offers huge reserves of oil and natural gas, important sea lanes of communication for the inﬂow and outﬂow of trade trafﬁc, and strategic raw materials among the littoral countries of Africa like tin, iron ore, uranium, diamond, gold, and some others (Kumar 2023). In political terms, it is part of the US’ national strategy to maintain a rule-based order in the Indo-Paciﬁc. In other words, it perceives the present condition of the area to be arbi- trary and problematic, particularly due to the presence and actions of the People’s Republic of China (PRC). According to the US, the PRC has a bullying character towards the countries in the Indo-Paciﬁc, referring to the varied examples of China’s problems with Taiwan, India, and in South China Sea. The US has raised a ﬁve-pronged approach to this area: 1. Advance a free and open Indo-Paciﬁc; 2. Build connections within and beyond the region; 3. Drive regional prosperity; 4. Bolster Indo-Paciﬁc security; and 5. Build regional resilience to transnational threats (The White House, Washington, and Executive Ofﬁce of the President: National Secu- rity Council, Washington DC 2022). For this, the US has heavily relied on building relations with the regional powers and is encouraging multilateral institutions to gather support for the achievement of a rule-based order in the region. From working on joint technological advancements to promoting an economic framework, to supporting India’s sustained regional leadership in South Asia, US involvement in the region demonstrates the signiﬁcance it attaches to it (The White House, Washington, and Executive Ofﬁce of the

7 INTERNATIONAL DIPLOMACY IN THE ERA … 121 President: National Security Council, Washington DC 2022). Undoubt- edly, it is the rapid ascendancy of another power centre that has stimulated US motivations to block its attempt by creating a counterforce. China’s stimulation for a dominating presence in the Indo-Paciﬁc stems from its ambitions of becoming a global power. The Indo-Paciﬁc holds the key to major resources and supply routes. In geopolitical terms, a good measure of sway in this region can translate into greater authority in international politics. Furthermore, it is not only the access to resources/raw materials but also that China’s majority of exports travel in this area to its destinations in South Asia, Southeast Asia, Africa, and West Asia. China’s understanding of the magnitude of ensuring safe and secure maritime access in the Indo-Paciﬁc has thus existed for a long time. Its Navy, the People’s Liberation Army Navy (PLA-N) has been revamped and refocused over the years to ﬁt the needs of China in this region. However, the country is also aware that its ambitions here can be easily thwarted by other maritime powers like the US and India. Hence China has come forward to act as the security power of the region and has made heavy inroads into the countries of South Asia and Africa to gain leverage. Infrastructural development has been the main mantra of the Asian heavyweight, as countries in South Asia and Africa started falling for the attractive development opportunities ﬁnanced by China. The BRI was launched in 2013 with the aim to help China in creating an alterna- tive trade route, by land and sea, connecting the countries from Asia to Europe and those in between. This has enabled the country to not only demonstrate itself as the main guarantor of infrastructural development in the region but also to gain a foothold as well as deal with traditional and non-traditional maritime threats in the vast region (Kumar 2023). India is extremely concerned with the need for a secured maritime environment in the Indo-Paciﬁc, particularly in the Indian Ocean Region (IOR). It is widely accepted among scholarly circles that India has been lax when it came to its maritime strategy in the Indian Ocean, until recently. India believes the Ocean and its adjoining areas are its natural sphere of inﬂuence. Hence it views itself as the main security provider in the region. However, it is only with China’s increasing footprint in the same area that India has strengthened its maritime policy in the IOR and the Indo-Paciﬁc. Particularly regarding the Indian Ocean, India has rapidly advanced various policy initiatives and has attempted to increase its presence and assistance to countries, particularly island nations. Such policy initiatives are multilateral as well as unilateral, with

122 S. MEHTA concerns ranging from infrastructure development to humanitarian assis- tance. The Security and Growth for All in the Region (SAGAR) initiative, launched in 2015, is the Indian policy of maritime engagement and coop- eration and independence and security of the Ocean. The Sagarmala Project, launched in 2021, aims to boost Indian infrastructure, partic- ularly the development of ports and connectivity along its coastline. India is part of the QUAD grouping, which has attracted so much controversy. At the same time, India maintains that it is not part of any alliance as such and seeks to play an important role in promoting and preserving the security of the Indo-Paciﬁc. Its interest in the Indo-Paciﬁc is not to counter Chinese inﬂuence even though India’s primary intention in the areas closer home regarding China’s presence, particularly in its neigh- bourhood, is different. Although India is aware that it cannot replace Chinese investment in these areas, it seeks to push itself as a viable alter- native and is aggressively advancing its image. India’s Neighborhood First policy is also important in this regard, as it includes the island countries of Sri Lanka and Maldives. They are also vital components of the Indian Ocean strategy. Thus, even while nurturing great power ambitions, India does not want to get caught in the line of ﬁre between the US and China. Its primary aim appears to secure its regional power status. Thus, both the US and PRC have legitimate claims in the region, and the Indo-Paciﬁc is an important theatre where a possible twenty-ﬁrst- century war is brewing. Both countries have acknowledged the challenges coming from either side and recognised each other as competitors. Both countries have also presented their respective worldviews regarding the region. While some scholars maintain, that the US policy in the Indo- Paciﬁc is much wider than just countering China (Pant and Mann 2023), some others believe it is only due to increasing Chinese inﬂuence in the same region that the US has launched its Indo-Paciﬁc strategy (Hu and Meng 2020). This has resulted in roughly two opposing blocs operating in a climate like that of the Cold War era. The biggest difference between the era before 1991 and post-2010s is the nature of international relations and diplomacy. Interconnectedness, technological advancements in society, economy, and politics, the emer- gence of multiple centres of power, and the hegemony of the market have transformed the world order. It is for the same reasons that the repercussions of the Russia-Ukraine conﬂict are felt around the world, not just limited to the US and Europe, although in different magnitudes and understanding. European Union’s stand regarding the Indo-Paciﬁc

7 INTERNATIONAL DIPLOMACY IN THE ERA … 123 is relatively new (the EU released the ‘EU Strategy for Cooperation in the Indo-Paciﬁc’ in 2021) and quite ambivalent. For the EU countries, the concept of the Indo-Paciﬁc and maritime security are novel concepts. While they do understand the US strategy to ‘contain’ China in the Indo-Paciﬁc, they have maintained that they are looking for a cooper- ative approach, particularly with China, to increase and maintain good conditions of trade (EEAS Press Team 2023). Just like the US, they also talk about a rule-based order in the region, although not neces- sarily treating China as a belligerent. In this aspect, it is closer to India’s approach towards the Indo-Paciﬁc rather than that of the US. For the EU, the Indo-Paciﬁc has associated economic concerns rather than secu- rity ones. It believes that the area is crucial for trade and is keen on building a free trade regime in the area, including with China. It is for this reason that it looks towards a safe and secure Indo-Paciﬁc maritime area. Hence, the transformed nature of international relations and the increased dependence on Chinese economic engagements have resulted in ambivalent attitudes, even from Europe, as they do not see a rival in either camps. As the conﬂict in the Indo-Paciﬁc gathers storm, the EU will be required to take on a more speciﬁc stand (EEAS Press Team 2023). India had earlier taken the path of non-alignment, to witness and reﬂect on conﬂicts independently, without conforming to any speciﬁc camp. India is more likely to be let off and accepted by the US than the EU’s unde- cided outlook. Thus, even though the Indo-Paciﬁc is not exactly Europe’s game to play, countries like France and Germany have formulated national policies regarding the Indo-Paciﬁc. World Politics in an Era of Incessant Conflicts The Russia-Ukraine war and the situation in the Indo-Paciﬁc, both exem- plify the nature of international relations in present times. While one has blown out in a full-scale war, the other is symbolic of a storm brewing and gathering clouds. Both conﬂicts are archetypical to the current global status quo, with multiple centres of power, connectivity, technological advancement, and economic interconnectedness playing signiﬁcant roles. Both are also intractable conﬂicts, with no apparent real solution to them. These two situations are only two examples of a range of other conﬂicts present in global politics now, including region-based and issue-based conﬂicts.

124 S. MEHTA Whenever an international order goes through a process of transforma- tion, regular and persisting conﬂicts become characteristic of that kind of status quo. The most recent example is that of the Cold War. However, even though the situation of permacrisis has been referred to Europe since the 2000s, surprisingly, global politics has been going through changes, contestations, and conﬂicts since the end of the Cold War. In both the cases of the Russia-Ukraine war and the crisis in the Indo-Paciﬁc, one can witness that the Western liberal order is a main point of contention, with one side backing it and the other resisting it. But neither Russia nor China is trying to completely overturn the status quo. Russia will come out of the present war with Ukraine weaker than it was before going in. In economic forums China has been referred to as the US’ main challenger. China has even tried setting up alternate international institutions when it could not get enough leverage in the Western-created and Western-led ones. For example, it launched the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB), which seeks to act as an alternative to the IMF and WB (Hallaert and Messerlin 2020). Indeed, the West has even been accused of widening the contours of the liberal order to justify their actions on several occa- sions, for example with the making of and the invasion by the ‘Coalition of the Willing’ in Iraq (Patrick 2015). Hence, it can be said that the world did not settle down after the end of the Cold War. Challenges to the liberal order, or its exclusive tendencies, are coming from not only Russia, China, North Korea, and Iran, but also from emerging countries like India, Brazil, and South Africa which conform to the existing order (Flockhart 2018). The focus of these countries is inclusivity and changes that need to be made in the existing political and economic liberal order. Today market economy and technological knowledge are the two main drivers of power. They are also the main areas of attack. There are also several non-traditional political security threats like climate change and terrorism that have emerged and gained strength as a by-product of the globalisation process. Globalisation and the development of a multipolar world, with several regional power centres, have exacerbated the compe- tition, with old powers trying to hold on to the regions of prior inﬂuence and new powers are attempting to garner authority. This has in part led to the persistent nature of conﬂicts. In the developing world, the emergence of regional powers due to the prior withdrawal of major powers has created a vacuum that has led to competition today. Neither do major powers like the US want to spread themselves too thinly over every region and hence have called on

7 INTERNATIONAL DIPLOMACY IN THE ERA … 125 emerging powers like India to take on global responsibility. In this era of persistent crises ranging from ﬁnancial to humanitarian, alternate centres of power are emerging. Indeed, this phenomenon is more powerful than the confrontation of the big powers. Emerging countries like India are taking advantage of this opportunity by developing themselves as invest- ment and manufacturing hubs as well as playing an important role in strategic supply chain management. Politically, India has chosen to judge international events independently, according to its perceived national interest. We have discussed above how India chose to remain silent on the Russia-Ukraine war due to the geopolitical threats and felt inse- curity from its north. The European Union has insisted more on a cooperative economic stand on the Indo-Paciﬁc, rather than a confronta- tionist attitude at a time when the American security umbrella over the EU has become questionable. Hence what the world might witness, in the coming decades, is a bigger role being played by emerging powers determined to bargain best from the existing system. Conclusion International relations are in a state of transformation. The recurrent conﬂicts—political, social, and economic—are demonstrative of the trans- formation. The crux of permacrisis is the challenges and resistance facing the existing liberal world order. Some of these situations are created by natural causes, like the pandemic in 2020. Nevertheless, in either its source or consequences, the conﬂicts reveal the shortcomings of the Western-led rule-based regime. Supporters of this regime do not support it blindly, but only to the extent to which it is in line with and supportive of their own national strategies. The rise of regional centres of power has acted as alternative sources of support, both in political and ﬁnancial terms. There is also a discernible difference in opinion and motivations between the US and the EU in terms of foreign policy and national requirements. As a result, the divisive lines have grown sharper. Soon, a complete Western-led liberal world order seems unlikely without changes, inclusions, and adjustments. The emerging powers have gained enough strength that they cannot be ignored and must be included in multilateral decision-making.

126 S. MEHTA References EEAS Press Team. 2023, May 11. EU-Indo Paciﬁc strategy. https://www.eeas. europa.eu/eeas/eu-indo-paciﬁc-strategy_en. Flockhart, T. 2018. A multi-order world? RSA Journal 164 (3): 26–31. https:// doi.org/10.2307/26798349. Goodman, M. P ., Reynolds, M., and Fittipaldi, J. 2022. Economic security in emerging markets a look at India, Vietnam, and Indonesia. Centre for Strategic and International Studies, 1–10. https://www.jstor.org/stable/resrep41417. Hallaert, J.-J., and Messerlin, P . A. 2020. The Tragedy of International Orga- nizations in a World Order in Turmoil. European Centre for International Political Economy. 1–21. https://www.jstor.org/stable/resrep26315. Hamilton, E. 2023, February 21. The global supply chain consequences of the Russia-Ukraine war. News—University of Florida. https://news.uﬂ.edu/ 2023/02/russia-ukraine-global-supply-chain/. Hu, W., and W. Meng. 2020. The US Indo-Paciﬁc strategy and China’s response. China Review 20 (3): 143–176. https://doi.org/10.2307/26928115. India’s Response to Russia’s War in Ukraine. 2022, July 8. Crisis Group. https://www.crisisgroup.org/asia/south-asia/india/indias-response- russias-war-ukraine. Kulik, L. 2023, May 16. What next for India and Russia in trade and invest- ment. The Economic Times. https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/ economy/foreign-trade/what-next-for-india-and-russia-in-trade-and-invest ment/articleshow/100284543.cms?from=mdr. Naz, F., and M. Kear. 2022. Impact of Ukraine war on global energy and food supply chains. Strategic Studies 42 (2): 38–53. https://doi.org/10.2307/487 32349. One Year of Russia-Ukraine War: How the Conﬂict Impacted Indian Economy. 2023, February 24. The times of India. https://timesoﬁndia.indiatimes.com/ business/india-business/one-year-of-russia-ukraine-war-how-the-conﬂict-imp acted-indian-economy/articleshow/98214568.cms?from=mdr. Patrick, S. 2015. Global governance, transatlantic relations, and world order. German Marshall Fund of the United States,1 – 4 . http://www.jstor.com/sta ble/resrep18743. QUESTION NO.3771 IMPACT OF RUSSIA-UKRAINE WAR ON INDIA. n.d. Ministry of external affairs, government of India. https://mea.gov.in/ lok-sabha.htm?dtl/35061/QUESTION_NO3771_IMPACT_OF_RUSSIA UKRAINE_WAR_ON_INDIA). Shariatmadari, David. 2022. A year of ‘Permacrisis’. Collins Dictionary Language Blog. https://blog.collinsdictionary.com/language-lovers/a-year- of-permacrisis/.

7 INTERNATIONAL DIPLOMACY IN THE ERA … 127 Stackpole, B. 2022, June 28. Ripple effects from Russia-Ukraine war test global economies. MIT Sloan. https://mitsloan.mit.edu/ideas-made-to-matter/rip ple-effects-russia-ukraine-war-test-global-economies. Tellis, A. J. 2022, April. What is in our interest: India and the Ukraine war. Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. https://carnegieendowment. org/2022/04/25/what-is-in-our-interest-india-and-ukraine-war-pub-86961. The White House, Washington, and Executive Ofﬁce of the President: National Security Council, Washington DC. 2022, February. Indo-Paciﬁc strategy of the United States. https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/ 02/U.S.-Indo-Paciﬁc-Strategy.pdf.

CHAPTER 8 The Changing Nature of Conﬂict and Ramiﬁcations on International Humanitarian Law Shivani Gupta February 24, 2022, is likely to go down in history as a watershed moment in the contemporary world. Russia’s war against Ukraine was a global shock revealing a massive security threat that has shattered Europe’s peace. Thousands of Ukrainian civilians have been killed and countless buildings have been destroyed in the ongoing conﬂict. Tens of thou- sands of troops on both sides have also been killed or seriously injured. Almost two years after the seismic shock of Russia’s full-scale invasion, the Ukraine conﬂict has transformed into a protracted war of attrition. The initial assumptions of swift victory and decisive outcomes have dissolved, replaced by a complex and evolving stalemate where geopolitical ambi- tions clash with the stark reality of human suffering. Beyond Ukraine’s borders, the invasion shattered European security, reshaped inter-state S. Gupta (B) International Centre for Parliamentary Studies, London, UK e-mail: shivanigupta9000@gmail.com © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapor e Pte Ltd. 2024 O. Mishra and S. Sen (eds.), Global Political Economy, Geopolitics and International Security , https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-97-2231-0_8 129

130 S. GUPTA relations, and frayed a tightly knit global economy. This conﬂict is a reminder of the Cold War era, with Russia on one side, and NATO and the European Union on the other, with fears of the situation escalating into a bigger crisis, one not limited to the territory of Ukraine. These conditions are casting shadows of uncertainty over international alliances and partnerships. Nestled within the tumultuous folds of history, the Russia-Ukraine conﬂict stands as a stark reminder of the fragile balance between peace and conﬂict in an interconnected world. The conﬂict’s economic and social ramiﬁcations, which extend far beyond the battleﬁeld, will test the limits of international cooperation. This conﬂict is and will continue to alter the contours of the international order. The global economy, already reeling from the pandemic’s aftershocks, faces further headwinds, as disrupted supply chains and skyrocketing energy prices threaten interna- tional stability and prosperity. Meanwhile, the humanitarian crisis unfolds with millions displaced, cities reduced to rubble, and the human cost of war etched onto every war-torn face. As we wade through this murky landscape, it becomes clear that the Ukraine conﬂict is not merely a regional dispute, but a harbinger of a new and perilous chapter in global affairs. T he Russia-Ukraine Conflict: An International Armed Conflict? The foremost question in any international humanitarian law (IHL) anal- ysis is whether an armed conﬂict is taking place, and if so, of what kind. The primary goal of IHL is to protect civilians and regulate conduct of the parties during armed conﬂict. The rules that apply to a conﬂict are determined by its classiﬁcation and this is dependent upon the parties involved. International armed conﬂict (IAC) involves hostilities between states, whereas non-international conﬂict (NIAC) occurs when a certain level of violence occurs between a state and an organised armed group or between organised armed groups. The current conﬂict in Ukraine is an international armed conﬂict governed by the four Geneva Conventions and Additional Protocol I (API), to which both Ukraine and Russia are parties. There are signiﬁcant differences between international armed conﬂict and non-international armed conﬂict. The 1907 Hague IV Conven- tions, the four 1949 Geneva Conventions, and Additional Protocol I to

8 THE CHANGING NATURE OF CONFLICT … 131 those Conventions apply during an international armed conﬂict. During a non-international armed conﬂict, the majority of applicable treaty law is provided by Common Article 3 of the 1949 Geneva Conventions and the Additional Protocol II. The latter only applies to Parties to the instru- ment and in speciﬁc types of non-international armed conﬂicts. Overall, the body of customary international law applicable in international armed conﬂict is far more extensive than that applicable in non-international armed conﬂict. International armed conﬂict exists under the following circumstances: 1. when there are hostilities between the armed forces or other organs of States; 2. during belligerent occupation of one State by another; 3. when a State is in “control” of an organised armed group ﬁghting another State; and 4. ﬁnally, the last type is limited to Parties to Additional Protocol I and involves groups ﬁghting for self-determination (ICRC). Between February 2014 and February 2022, there were multiple NIACs between Ukraine and separatist groups backed by Russia. Russia’s “special military operations” (UNSC 2022) in Ukraine began in February 2022, ushering in a new phase of the conﬂict. Military operations also trans- formed previously existing NIACs into IACs as Russia began to exert overall control over such groups. As a result, all parties are now subject to the IHL rules that govern such conﬂicts. The two parties have also acknowledged that they were engaged in an international armed conﬂict governed by IHL. T he Resurgence of International Armed Conflicts The nature of conﬂict has changed dramatically since the end of the Cold War. The majority of conﬂicts were fought between domestic groups rather than states. Conventional wars between two or more states were becoming less common. What had replaced them was what Mary Kaldor referred to as “new wars” (Kaldor 1999). Non-state actors such as polit- ical militias, criminal gangs, and international terrorist organisations are frequently involved in these conﬂicts. Regional tensions, a weak state of the rule of law, lack of accountability of state institutions, illegal economic

132 S. GUPTA gain, and the scarcity of resources intensiﬁed by climate change, have become dominant drivers of such conﬂicts. It was thought that the era of conventional inter-state wars was as good as over. However, the inter- national armed conﬂict in Ukraine has brought back a type and scale of armed conﬂict that the international community has long pledged to erad- icate. It was out of this fear of a resurgence of state-on-state conﬂicts that the Chief of the General Staff of the UK compared the current crisis to their “1937 moment” that ravaged Europe 80 years ago (Pszczel 2022). Three months before the invasion of Ukraine by Russia, the then- British Prime Minister Boris Johnson had rejected the suggestions of increasing heavy weapons for the British army. “The old concepts of ﬁghting big tank battles on European landmass are over” (Johnson 2021), he said, however only a couple of months later, he was urging the UK to send more battle tanks to assist Ukraine in its ﬁght against Russian forces. Moreover, the conﬂict has also started a new arms race that reminds one of the 1930s build-up to World War II. Russia has mobilised hundreds of thousands of conscripts and plans to increase its military strength from 1 million to 1 and a half million troops. The United States has increased weapons production to replace the stock- piles sent to Ukraine. France intends to increase military spending by one-third by 2030, while Germany has lifted its longstanding prohibi- tion on sending weapons to conﬂict zones and shipped missiles and tanks to Ukraine (Aljazeera 2023). Prior to the start of the war, it was largely believed that military operations would shift towards more advanced tech- nology and cyber warfare, with less dependence on tanks or artillery. However, the Ukraine war has seen a convergence of both old and new war technologies. The Russia-Ukraine conﬂict has thus shown the world that conventional warfare, state-on-state, has returned. While Russian President Vladimir Putin had hoped the invasion would weaken NATO, instead, the military alliance originally formed to counter the Soviet Union has found a new purpose. Finland and Sweden, two neutral countries that had previously avoided becoming a part of NATO joined it as protection against Russia. The European Union also retaliated against Russia with tough sanctions and sent Ukraine billions in support. Moreover, the war also drew the US back into European politics after decades of inactivity there. Some gaps, however, can be identiﬁed in this Western unity. For instance, the Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orban, a close ally of Putin in the EU, lobbied against sanctions on Moscow and

8 THE CHANGING NATURE OF CONFLICT … 133 refused to send weapons to Ukraine. The longer the conﬂict will last, the greater will be the strain on Western unity. Application of the International Humanitarian Law in the Russia-Ukraine Conflict Since both Russia and Ukraine are signatories to the four Geneva Conven- tions of 1949 and their Additional Protocol I of 1977, the current armed conﬂict in Europe is an international armed conﬂict to which the full range of relevant international humanitarian law treaties applies. Russian operations have resulted in a vast number of civilian deaths as well as widespread damage to or destruction of residential and medical infrastruc- ture, and historical monuments among other things. This demonstrates that the fundamental tenets of the conduct of hostilities in accordance with IHL have in many cases not been followed. There have also been deliberate attacks on critical civilian infrastructure such as electrical grids and water processing plants (Pearson 2023). The objective of such attacks is to break civilian morale. This would be unlawful as per the IHL. Most of the violations of IHL have occurred against civilians and civilian objects in Ukraine. This is mainly due to the fact that most of the hostilities are taking place within Ukrainian territory. Patterns of abuse have also been reported concerning the treatment of persons captured by the enemy, the execution of civilians, mistreatment in detention facilities, deportations of children among others. According to the UN Human Rights Moni- toring Mission in Ukraine, both sides of the conﬂict are allegedly guilty of abusing POWs that could amount to war crime (HRW 2022). Despite the use of modern technology, the current hostilities between Russia and Ukraine have in a lot of ways resembled the World War era warfare. The Ukraine-Russia conﬂict, as an International Armed Conﬂict, taking place on a large scale after a long period of time, has brought to light legal and practical issues that are reminiscent of the World War periods. During the initial period of humanitarian operations in Ukraine, ICRC struggled to cope and provide efﬁcient service. Top ICRC ofﬁcials had little recent and direct experience with international armed conﬂict involving major powers of the type seen in the Ukraine and Russia war. This is because majority of ICRC activities in recent times had focused on intra-state conﬂicts with changing levels of violence in “fragile societies” in non-Western areas. Organisational history, precedents and “doctrine” concerning major wars were not always visible in Geneva (Forsythe 2023).

134 S. GUPTA The war has also highlighted some gaps in international humanitarian law. Important among them include the uncertainty relating to the exact protection afforded to civilians during a foreign invasion, the lack of clarity and consensus with regard to the meaning of mercenaries, the application of the nationality criterion in case of dual or multiple nationals in terms of Prisoner of War status, the crime of forced recruitment of civilians, and the absence of a universally accepted prohibition on certain types of weapons, such as cluster munitions. Another signiﬁcant gap in the application of IHL is the role of cyber operations in the conduct of the war. This is a problem exacerbated due to the unavailability of facts as the States have a tendency to try and keep the extent and methods of cybercrimes under wraps. Russia-Ukraine War and the Changing World The events in Ukraine have served as a sobering reminder of the costs of war. Since Russia invaded Ukraine in February 2022, millions of people have been forced to ﬂee their homes; vast acres of valuable land have been left destroyed or rendered unusable; and unfortunately, thousands of people have been killed as a consequence of the ongoing violence. The crisis has demonstrated how intrinsically connected the world and its risks are. At a time when countries around the world had just started to recover from the lingering effects of an unexpected global pandemic, the events in Ukraine have added another layer of complication to an already hostile security landscape. What began as a regional conﬂict has quickly evolved into a political and economic crisis with extensive world- wide implications. Unfortunately, it is evident that the conﬂict is far from over. The crisis has left the world in a signiﬁcantly altered state than it was prior to Russia’s invasion. These changes will continue to be felt for a long time in the future. These changes also include macro ones with disruptions in the world order. It has become evident that the crisis has ramiﬁcations beyond the European security architecture and the main adversaries. The use of sanctions against Russia and counter sanctions by Russia on the West has deepened the gulf between the East and the West. The war has also had major economic implications as economies around the world had only begun to recover from the repercussions of COVID- 19. This war has thus been a disaster for Ukraine as well as Russia and a crisis for the rest of the world. The world has become a more unstable and fearful place since Russia invaded its neighbour on February 24, 2022.

8 THE CHANGING NATURE OF CONFLICT … 135 Some of the major ways in which the Russia-Ukraine crisis has changed the world are discussed below: Return of European Wars and Shifting Alliances The war between Russia and Ukraine has been referred to as a “war against the West” (Tenzer 2023). It is held that Putin’s regime has chosen confrontation with the “collective West”, irrespective of the costs for Russia itself (Zakharova 2023). Russia maintains that, “the 2014 coup was stage-managed by Western countries to make Ukraine anti-Russia. The interest of the West lies in pitting two fraternal peoples against one another in the ‘colonial tradition’ to prevent the Russian Federation’s re- emergence as a global Power and delay a new multipolar world” (UNGA 2023). Such a narrative has resulted in the West calling Russia “the most signiﬁcant and direct threat to Allies’ security” (NATO 2023). Moreover, this has made Russia’s neighbours fear that Russia may in future indulge in aggression against other countries. The decision by Finland and Sweden to join the NATO is a case in point. The war has accelerated actions which were unthinkable before, an example being Ukraine’s EU candi- date status being granted within three months. Indeed, most European countries have signiﬁcantly increased their defence budgets. Russia’s invasion has also strengthened NATO and provided it with a renewed vigour with an increased presence in Eastern Europe. Due to a major war breaking out in Europe after decades, countries around the world are now divided into three major groups. These include ﬁrstly, the ones who sided with Russia, secondly, the ones who vowed support to Ukraine, and lastly, a group of non-aligned nations avoiding involve- ment. This trend indicates a partial resurgence of what used to be many countries’ original positions during the Cold War. The European Union states were quick to respond with major sanc- tions and action against Russia. Most of the European countries depended upon the protective security umbrella of NATO, backed by American military capabilities. However, there is another group of countries that have openly supported Russia. For instance, Putin’s old allies, such as Syria’s Bashar al-Assad and Belarus’s Aliaksandr Lukashenka have extended their support to him. Russia also entered into a closer strategic relationship with Iran.

136 S. GUPTA In Asia, the region’s major powers, China and India refused to take a side and get entangled in the conﬂict. Thus these countries have princi- pally rejected the Western narrative of the conﬂict as a war between good and evil and have chosen to sustain their relationships with Russia for a combination of economic, military, and diplomatic beneﬁts. While the United Nations Security Council has not been able to play a vital role in the conﬂict, mainly owing to the paralysing effect of Russia’s veto, the UN General Assembly passed a resolution condemning Russia’s aggres- sion with an overwhelming majority. However, solidarity with Ukraine is evidently not universal among all UN members as the resolution saw thirty-ﬁve abstentions (UNGA 2022). Most of these abstentions came from African countries. This shows that most African states mirror the sentiments shared by some of their Asian counterparts. Increased Use of Private Military Companies (PMCs) in War Operations Russian private military companies (PMCs) have already been active in Syria and Africa in recent years (Mishra 2023). The most prominent Russian mercenary group is the Wagner group which ﬁrst made an appear- ance in Crimea in 2014. Russia’s war against Ukraine has seen an upsurge in the use of such companies. The purpose of using such PMCs is to provide deniability of Russian involvement in war crimes. This has become possible because of the ambiguous legal status of private mili- tary companies around the world. However, Russia’s use of such PMCs poses a serious threat to international security because they are changing the meaning of mercenary. Companies such as the Wagner group do not ﬁt into the traditional “soldier of fortune” meaning of mercenaries. The 1977 Additional Protocols I and II of the Geneva Conventions banned mercenaries. This was mainly because they were warriors without a state, who fought for proﬁt rather than an ideology. Article 47 of Protocol I to the Geneva Convention provides the most widely accepted deﬁnition of a mercenary in international law. However, the Article has a lot of loopholes which has allowed private military companies to operate comparatively easily. Russia has been using these legal ambiguities, surrounding these companies in terms of International Law to conduct its operations against Ukraine.

8 THE CHANGING NATURE OF CONFLICT … 137 The Future of Russia in International Relations The present war between Russia and Ukraine has broken the myth of Russian invincibility. The original goal of the invasion has evidently not been achieved yet. Russian forces had to withdraw from the vicinity of Kyiv and had to retreat from many other places. Ukraine’s strategic use of limited resources, reinforced by foreign assistance has provided an unexpected resistance to Russia’s military strength. Russia suffered huge human losses as is evident by its extension of the age limit for volun- teers to join the war. Additionally, Russia has paid a high price for the war. Sanctions are starting to pinch and will most likely set the Russian economy back for decades. This is particularly so as Russia is unable to produce quite a lot of essential goods without the import of foreign technology or parts. Apparently unemployment is at a decline, however, it is mainly because a large number of the people in Russia have been mobilised in war efforts. It is estimated that in 2022, Russia’s gross domestic product (GDP) dropped by 2.1% (Council of the European Union 2023). Thousands of companies, from Apple to McDonald’s, that have either ceased or reduced their operations in Russia have effectively added to the pressure. This exodus, combined with a national conscrip- tion drive in 2022, has resulted in a large number of Russian citizens ﬂeeing the country. This exacerbates the already existing “brain drain” upon a weak economy. Thus the war has made the Russian Federation an international pariah and the country is not likely to recover its reputation for a long period of time. However, this does not mean that Moscow is entirely without friends. Russia has strengthened economic relations with China. Nevertheless, China has avoided getting directly entangled in the conﬂict by refusing to send weapons in Russia’s support. The outcomes of this war are likely to serve as either an encouragement or a warning to China which might harbour the hope of reclaiming Taiwan by force. Moreover, Putin has strengthened military ties with North Korea and Iran, which provides armed drones that Russia uses against Ukraine’s infrastructure. No matter how weakened or secluded by the West, Putin’s Russia continues to bolster its inﬂuence in Africa and the Middle East through the use of its economic and military strength.

138 S. GUPTA The Return of the Nuclear Threat The end of the Cold War and the establishment of the US-Russian arms control regime had made the threat of nuclear weapons less relevant. However, ever since the invasion of Ukraine by Russia, the world has seen regular nuclear weapons threats from Russia, though most of them have been indirect. Such war strategies that use nuclear threats have resulted in a return of nuclear arms power competition on a global level. It is owing to this that the current President of the United States, Joe Biden stated that the risk of a “nuclear Armageddon” is at its highest level since 60 years (Biden 2022). In addition, the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant which happens to be Europe’s largest nuclear power plant is located in an active conﬂict zone, raising the fear of spectre of a new Chernobyl. The Use of Modern Technology in Warfare With the widespread use of open-source intelligence (OSINT) during the Russia-Ukraine conﬂict, a new type of information warfare has emerged. By making use of the advantages offered by satellite imagery, smart- phones, and social media, Ukrainian forces have modiﬁed the traditional kill chain. By outsourcing parts of it to their civilians reporting Russian movements, it has been able to create a more extensive and resilient network. This war is also an example of a ﬁrst sustained conﬂict which for the ﬁrst time saw the use of all the currently available uses for drones which are integrated into combined operations on both sides. Energy and Food Crisis Both Russia and Ukraine being major suppliers of energy, food, and fertilisers, the present conﬂict has resulted in a disruption in their supply for both developing and developed countries. These effects have further globalised the consequences of war. The most signiﬁcant shift has been Europe’s move away from reliance on Russian gas. With a record of keeping the gas supply on even during the Cold War, Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, and the nuclear crisis of the 1980s, Russia assumed Europe would get desperate for gas. However, Europe responded to the supply disruption in two ways: by looking for gas elsewhere and by hastening its progress to renewable energy. Before the war broke out, the EU had committed to reduce emissions by 40%

8 THE CHANGING NATURE OF CONFLICT … 139 and attain 32% renewables. In the aftermath of the Russian invasion, those targets were raised to 57% and 45%, respectively (European Commission 2022). A number of African countries including Mozambique and Nigeria are now being wooed by powerful countries of both the West and East for energy supplies. This has the potential to be a game-changer in geopol- itics with Europe looking towards African energy to help in the energy transition, giving African states leveraging power. Thus evidently Putin’s aim of using gas as a weapon has so far failed to serve the purpose. With Europe’s vast pipelines standing idle, Russia was at the risk of having stranded assets, further weakening its economy. Owing to this it had to look elsewhere for new customers. It has found some success. Along with India, China is now the equal largest importer of Russian oil and has signed a new 30-year gas deal. Moreover, since both Russia and Ukraine are major exporters of agri- cultural fertilisers, the disruption to global food chains increased essential goods prices to a lifetime high. This resulted in a cost-of-living crisis in both the developed as well as developing economies. Furthermore, the disruption of both harvests and a Russian grain blockade made the world susceptible to a humanitarian disaster. This is particularly true in the case of developing countries many of which are dependent on imported wheat. The World Food Programme (WFP) exclaimed that the current crisis remains at “unprecedented proportions” with as many as 783 million people facing chronic hunger (World Food Programme 2023). Addition- ally, high fuel prices also result in increased fertiliser prices and transport costs, which lead to further increases in the price of food for consumers. An Ailing World Economy The current war between Russia and Ukraine has hampered global trade that was still recovering from the effects of the global pandemic. As pointed out above, since Russia and Ukraine are major suppliers and producers of wheat and fertiliser, food prices have risen exponentially. The effects of the war have been felt far and wide from chilly homes in Europe during winters to soaring prices in food markets in Africa. Before the war, the European Union nations imported almost half of their natural gas and a third of their oil from Russia. The Russian invasion of Ukraine resulted in sanctions against Russia that led to an energy price shock, the likes of which the world had not seen since the 1970s.

140 S. GUPTA Although, over time food prices have reduced from the record highs, food continues to be used as a geopolitical weapon. Russia has laid the blame for the food price increase upon the West. Ukraine and its supporters on the other hand accuse Russia of using hunger and famine as a weapon of war. Thus the present war has highlighted the fragility of an interconnected world, just as the pandemic did. The war also set back attempts to ﬁght climate change, increasing Europe’s use of coal. However, Europe’s search for alternatives to Russian oil and gas may result in an accelerated transition to renewable energy sources. A Large Refugee Crisis One of the most visible consequences of the Russian invasion has been the internal and external displacement of millions of Ukrainians. According to the United Nations High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR), there are nearly 5.1 million internally displaced people in Ukraine (as of May 2023), while more than 6.2 million refugees from Ukraine have been recorded globally (as of July 2023). Approximately 17.6 million people are in the need of humanitarian assistance in 2023, the vast majority of them being women and children (UNHCR 2023). The highest propor- tions of these displaced people can now be found in the neighbouring countries of Poland, Germany, and the Czech Republic. According to Beata Javorcik, the chief economist at the European Bank for Reconstruc- tion and Development, “this is the fastest forced displacement of people since the 1940s” (Javorcik 2022). The loss of human capital will also impact Ukraine’s economic recovery and its ability to rebuild the country when the war is ﬁnally over. T he Future of Non-international Armed Conflict Armed conﬂicts continue to affect every region across the globe. Each conﬂict gives rise to unique humanitarian challenges and poten- tially signals new trends in geopolitics. The Ukraine-Russia conﬂict has given the international community an obvious reason to be concerned about a resurgence of armed conﬂict between states after decades of primarily non-international armed conﬂicts. The international commu- nity is watching with fear of a potential Chinese invasion of Taiwan following the heels of the Russian invasion of Ukraine. Overall, recent events have compelled the world to prepare for more international

8 THE CHANGING NATURE OF CONFLICT … 141 conﬂicts in the near future. Yet, regardless of whether these develop- ments signify the return of state-to-state conﬂict, the trends observed over the last two decades also continue. There is no sign of an end to the protracted non-international armed conﬂicts continuing in Syria and Yemen. Despite a worrying resurgence of international armed conﬂicts, the vast majority of conﬂicts in the world continue to be non-international armed conﬂicts. These conﬂicts often involve a myriad of non-state armed groups, spill across borders, and typically involve foreign states inter- vening on the side of territorial states or non-state armed groups. The fact that non-international armed conﬂicts are here to stay and will continue to have major repercussions on the political and economic scene cannot be more evident than from the outbreak of the Israel-Hamas conﬂict. The Russia-Ukraine war demonstrated how intricately interconnected the global geopolitical economic and landscapes are. The consequences of the conﬂict between Israel and Hamas, which began on October 7, 2023, are already being felt around the world. Economic disruption, growing military vulnerabilities, increased political polarisation, new strategic chal- lenges, and the changing nature of warfare are among the identiﬁable global threats. The Israel-Palestine conﬂict is the latest chapter in the decades-long cycle of violence in the Middle East region that regrettably appears to have no end in sight. While the reasons behind these events are complex, the conﬂict’s immediate and potential long-term political and economic repercussions are difﬁcult to dismiss. The war in Gaza reﬂects the chal- lenges of conﬂicts that involve non-state armed groups. Israel has fought as many as four conventional state-on-state wars with its neighbouring countries between 1948 and 1973. However, in many ways, ﬁghting non-state armed groups have proven to be more complicated. Regard- less of the outcome of Israel’s war in Gaza, the current war has made it evident that Israel will have to rethink its entire strategy towards the failing Middle East peace process if it wants to invest in sustainable peace for itself. Moreover, conﬂicts in the Middle East tend to lead to an increase in oil prices. Additionally, if the Israel-Hamas war escalates, the impact on oil prices could make it more expensive for the West to maintain its sanctions on Russian oil and gas. If the conﬂict extends to major oil- producing nations in the region, an already ailing global economy could face further severe jolts as energy costs for businesses and households could increase substantially. This is most likely so as the energy supply

142 S. GUPTA is usually disrupted during such conﬂicts. Higher energy prices would also impede national banks’ efforts across the world to bring inﬂation under control in both developed as well as developing economies. Thus in less than three months after Hamas breached Israel’s security wall in more than 20 locations, the war has already had a global impact. The longer the Gaza War continues, the greater the possibility of far-reaching consequences beyond the Israeli or Palestinian borders. The Israel-Hamas war has thus demonstrated how non-international armed conﬂicts continue to have a signiﬁcant political and economic impact on the global geopolitical scene. The Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their Additional Protocols of 1977 were largely drafted with interna- tional armed conﬂicts in mind. However, in recent decades, contemporary armed conﬂicts have differed in many ways from “traditional” inter-state wars. As a result, it has been often stated that this legal framework is no longer relevant or provides insufﬁcient regulation for contemporary armed conﬂicts. However, the current geopolitical scene is witnessing both, a major international armed conﬂict as well as a non-international armed conﬂict. Both conﬂicts have outlined to the international commu- nity that international humanitarian law has, in fact, endured over time. However, it is also evident that the primary legal issues associated with the conduct of modern warfare remain the same in both cases. Technology continues to advance at a rapid pace, with cyber operations, autonomous weapons, and the use of outer space raising concerns about the appli- cation and interpretation of IHL. IHL needs to develop further into a comprehensive protective legal framework through jurisprudence, state practice, the development of weapons treaties, and soft law interpreta- tions and guidance. The challenges to IHL exposed by the recent conﬂicts need to be addressed to help it develop and adapt to the evolving nature of warfare and new technologies. Concluding T houghts Since February 2022, there has been an ongoing international armed conﬂict between Russia and Ukraine. The Bolshevik revolutionary Vladimir Lenin is believed to have stated that “there are decades where nothing happens, and there are weeks where decades happen”. While the quote’s veriﬁability is questionable, its assertion cannot be truer when it comes to Russia’s international armed conﬂict against Ukraine.

8 THE CHANGING NATURE OF CONFLICT … 143 The world has changed dramatically in the two years since Russian President Vladimir Putin launched his “special military operation”, against Ukraine. These changes are perhaps in some way irrevocable. Russia’s war in Ukraine is a continuing tragedy, ruining lives and livelihoods in Ukraine and leading to changes in the global economy. This war, which broke out soon after the global pandemic, has brought about a new economic era. The present times are reminiscent of other major historical events including the immediate aftermath of World War II (1944–46), the oil crisis (1971–73), and the disintegration of the Soviet Union (1989–92). Each of those events altered the global landscape owing to the release of powerful underlying forces that had been accumulating over a fault line. Each marked the beginning of a new era. The changes being brought about by the Russia-Ukraine international armed conﬂict are being rein- forced by another major non-international conﬂict between Israel and Hamas. If these conﬂicts continue to escalate, the devastation will have an accelerating affect upon every aspect of people’s lives across the world. The repercussions of these wars are particularly worrying in the light of an already bleak picture of an ailing global economy. In such a situa- tion of permacrisis, the prominence and importance of the international humanitarian law is increasing like never before. However, with majority of these crises posing newer challenges that are either outside IHL’s protective scope or is very vaguely dealt with, respect for IHL and compli- ance with its priorities is endangered like never before. It is therefore of crucial importance for the international humanitarian law to develop and expand so that it can adapt to the evolving nature of warfare and new technologies. References A Global Food Crisis. 2023. World food programme. https://www.wfp.org/glo bal-hunger-crisis. Biden says risk of ‘nuclear Armageddon’ highest in 60 years. 2022, October 7. Aljazeera. https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2022/10/7/biden-says-nuc lear-armageddon-risk-highest-in-60-years. 2030 Climate and Energy Framework. 2021. European commission. https://cli mate.ec.europa.eu/eu-action/climate-strategies-targets/2030-climate-energy- framework_en. Deterrence and defence. 2023. NATO. https://www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/ topics_133127.htm.

144 S. GUPTA Forsythe, D. 2023. International humanitarian law and the war in Ukraine: The International Committee of the Red Cross and humanitarian policies. Focus, 23. https://www.alternatives-humanitaires.org/en/2023/07/21/int ernational-humanitarian-law-and-the-war-in-ukraine-the-international-commit tee-of-the-red-cross-and-humanitarian-policies/#:~:text=Top%20ICRC%20o fﬁcials%20had%20little,%E2%80%9D%20in%20non%2DWestern%20areas. General Assembly Overwhelmingly Adopts Resolution Demanding Russian Federation Immediately End Illegal Use of Force in Ukraine, Withdraw All Troops. United Nations General Assembly Meetings Coverage and Press Releases, GA/12407. https://press.un.org/en/2022/ga12407.doc.htm. Infographic -— Impact of Sanctions on the Russian Economy. 2023. Euro- pean council. https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/infographics/impact-san ctions-russian-economy/ International Armed Conﬂict n.d. ICRC. https://casebook.icrc.org/a_to_z/glo ssary/international-armed-conﬂict. Kaldor, M. 1999. New and old wars: Organized violence in a global era. Polity Press. Merrick, R. 2022, August 27. Liz Truss to ‘update’ defence priorities following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Independent. https://www.independent.co.uk/ news/uk/politics/liz-truss-defence-russia-trident-b2154130.html. Mishra, A. 2023, July 05. Wagner’s future role in Africa. Manohar Parrikar Institute for Defence Studies and Analyses. https://www.idsa.in/idsacomme nts/Wagner-Future-Role-in-Africa-amishra-050723. No return to ‘business as usual’: Europe development bank. 2022, November 22. The Economic Times. Pearson, J. 2023, November 9. Russian spies behind cyber attack on Ukraine power grid in 2022—researchers. Reuters. https://www.reuters.com/techno logy/cybersecurity/russian-spies-behind-cyberattack-ukrainian-power-grid- 2022-researchers-2023-11-09/. Political Solution Founded on International Law, Restoring Ukraine’s Territorial Integrity, Only Way to End War, General Assembly President Tells Delegates. 2023. United Nations meetings coverage and press releases,GA/12516. https:// press.un.org/en/2023/ga12516.doc.htm. Pszczel, R. 2022. The consequences of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine for interna- tional security—NATO and beyond. NATO Review . https://www.nato.int/ docu/review/articles/2022/07/07/the-consequences-of-russias-invasion-of- ukraine-for-international-security-nato-and-beyond/index.html. Russia boosts size of armed forces by 170,000 troops. 2023, December 2. Aljazeera. https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2023/12/2/russia-to-boost- size-of-armed-forces-by-170000-troops. Russian Federation Announces ‘Special Military Operation’ in Ukraine as Security Council Meets in Eleventh-Hour Effort to Avoid Full-Scale Conﬂict. 2022,

8 THE CHANGING NATURE OF CONFLICT … 145 February 23. United Nations meetings coverage and press releases, SC/14803. https://press.un.org/en/2022/sc14803.doc.htm. Tenzer, Nicolas. 2023. Countering Russia’s horizontal war. Tenzer Strate- gics. https://open.substack.com/pub/tenzerstrategics/p/countering-russias- horizontal-war?utm_campaign=post&utm_medium=web. Ukraine Emergency. n.d. UNHCR. https://shorturl.at/cnSZ3. Ukraine: Apparent POW Abuse Would Be War Crime. 2022. Human rights watch. https://www.hrw.org/news/2022/03/31/ukraine-apparent- pow-abuse-would-be-war-crime. Zakharova, M. 2023. Brieﬁng by foreign ministry spokeswoman Maria Zakharova. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation. https:// mid.ru/en/press_service/video/briﬁngi/1902083/.

CHAPTER 9 ‘Idealist’s Dream or Realist’s Cudgel’: Examining Sanctions as Instruments of Statecraft Souradeep Sen and Zaad Mahmood Sanction, broadly understood as a non-military response to conﬂicts among nations, is a popular instrument of statecraft. As a supplement to war leveraging interdependence, sanctions have the potential to serve as a powerful weapon to achieve diplomatic and foreign policy objectives particularly in period of permacrisis. Conceptually, permacrisis refers to a condition of permanent low-level conﬂicts due to the systemic complexity of the international order. The origins and continuation of permacrisis can be attributed to the ways in which the United States of America, along with other Western states, have S. Sen (B) University of North Bengal, Siliguri, India e-mail: souradeepsen18@gmail.com Z. Mahmood Presidency University, Kolkata, India e-mail: zaad.polsc@presiuniv.ac.in © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapor e Pte Ltd. 2024 O. Mishra and S. Sen (eds.), Global Political Economy, Geopolitics and International Security , https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-97-2231-0_9 147

148 S. SEN AND Z. MAHMOOD increasingly ‘weaponised’ interdependence by leveraging global networks of informational and ﬁnancial exchange for strategic advantage (Farrell and Newman 2019), thereby engendering the systemic complexity. The global nodes of permacrisis point are best fathomed at the domain of global political economy or geoeconomics as conditions of global complexity have transformed interdependence into the new battleground (Galeotti 2021). With the decline in US hegemony and the rise of China, the same geoeconomic instruments of interdependence are now being deployed by other countries for coercive ends, which has only entrenched the self- same crisis. Thus the weaponisation of geoeconomic instruments has far- reaching implications for international security—where the lines between war and peace appear to have been blurred into near-irrelevance in a world of permanent low-level conﬂicts. In this context, sanctions as geoeconomics instrument have acquired increased relevance which is evident in the pervasiveness thereof. The use of sanctions has become ubiquitous since the end of the Cold War, thereby enabling scholars to label the 1990s as the ‘sanctions decade’ (Kovach 2015). Despite the popularity as a tool of statecraft, there exist signiﬁcant debate and uncertainty about the efﬁcacy of sanctions. The present chapter shall attempt to evaluate the basis of the utility and efﬁcacy of sanctions. Based on a systematic case study of sanc- tions episodes, it puts forward a conceptual model of the ‘triangular credo of utility and efﬁcacy’. We suggest that the utility and efﬁcacy of sanctions depends on speciﬁc political settlements engendered by the international system marked by ‘systemic complexity’; the characteristics of target countries such as nature of regime and economic condition; and the commitment and consensus of the sanction senders. In this triad, the systemic, domestic and sanction characteristics create unique ‘sanc- tion settlement’ that determine their efﬁcacy and utility. Intuitively, the authors emphasise that no strict set of universal criteria can be applied to infer efﬁcacy, as the international system is in a state of permacrisis, not least, as all reported cases of sanctions are intrinsically different due to domestic political variables, also because of the issues of motives and intents of states locked in sanctions contests. Discussion in the chapter shall evolve through the following sections: the ﬁrst would concern the history, competing deﬁnitions of sanctions, followed by a brief literature review of the debates surrounding their typologies, utility and efﬁcacy that culminate in the statements of the

9 ‘IDEALIST’S DREAM OR REALIST’S CUDGEL’: EXAMINING … 149 present inquest’s theoretical and methodological moorings; in the second section, the entry shall delve into the descriptive case studies of three speciﬁc sanctions cases since the 1990s to tease out particular inferences regarding their efﬁcacy; ﬁnally, in the third section, the inferences of the previous would be analysed comparatively to form abstractions and gener- alisations on the utility and efﬁcacy of sanctions in a world immanently at crisis. Understanding and Debating Sanctions Sanctions can simply be deﬁned as actions by one or more legal entities to limit or end their economic relations with a target entity in order to persuade the latter to change one or more of its policies (Morgan, Bapat, and Kobayashi 2014). The idea is based on a general theory of economic sanctions that encapsulates the following steps: economic punishment leads to economic disintegration, which leads to political disintegration, and which, in turn, leads to compliance (Baldwin and Pape 1998). Sanc- tions can take many forms such as tariffs, export controls, embargoes, import bans, travel bans, freezing of target assets, ceasing foreign aid and blockades. As geoeconomic instruments, sanctions have been considered both the idealist’s dream and the realist’s cudgel. These instruments promise the powerless a world free of war and discrimination and give the powerful tools for domination (Coates 2019). The earliest instance of economic sanctions can be traced back to ancient Athens, around 432 B.C., when Pericles issued the Megarian Decree to blockade Sparta’s allies. Historians contend that the decree helped ignite the Peloponnesian War (Kolhatkar 2022). In the modern era, more speciﬁcally, in 1806, Napoleon imposed his Continental System, forbidding European nations from trading with the United Kingdom (Kelerchian 2014). The contemporary iteration of sanctions can be traced to the League of Nations with the idea of a non-military coercive instrument to change state behaviour and restrain interstate war. The twentieth century normalised the practice of using sanctions as an ‘economic weapon’ in the hope that it would act as an antidote to war (Mulder 2022). Provisions for sanction measures were retained under Article 41 of the UN Charter, thereby perpetuating its legality (Charter of the United Nations 1945: 9, 11).

150 S. SEN AND Z. MAHMOOD Even though sanctions have been historically used as a tool of state- craft, their relevance increased exponentially in the post-Cold War era. The 1990s witnessed a stupendous increase in the promulgation of sanc- tions measures, particularly by the US as liberal optimism about the post-Cold War international order reigned supreme. As Fig. 9.1 shows, on average the world witnessed 10 sanctions imposed every year between 1965 and 1980, which increased slightly in the next decade. The marked increase in instances of sanctions occurred between 1990 and 2000, as on average the world witnessed nearly 50 sanctions every year. Despite the increase in popularity, the record of sanctions has been mixed at best which may have contributed to their decreasing numbers in recent years. Historically, there have been some cases of successful sanctions like the US threat of sanctions against Britain in 1956 that contributed to the end of the Suez Canal Crisis (Aldrich 1967; Peevers 2014). Another instance of ‘successful sanction’ was the US ‘invisible Fig. 9.1 Instance of Sanctions between 1965 and 2005. Source Hufbauer, Schott, and Elliott 2009

9 ‘IDEALIST’S DREAM OR REALIST’S CUDGEL’: EXAMINING … 151 blockade’ on Chile that exacerbated the economic crisis during Allende Presidency (Sigmund 1974) and created the conditions for a military coup under Pinochet. An international sanction against Apartheid South Africa (1977–91) is also considered among the few success stories in the major policy change category (Hufbauer and Oegg 2001). The instances of successful sanctions are however overwhelmed by cases of failure. The literature on sanctions presents a number of cases like the ‘ABCD’ (Americans, British, Chinese, and Dutch) Encirclement of Japan in 1940–41 to prevent the sale of crucial oil, iron, and steel to Japan as a response to its aggression in China and Indochina, US sanctions against Cuba to bring down the regime of Fidel Castro as instances of failed sanctions (Sanchez 2003; LeoGrande 2015). Similarly sanctions against North Korea since its foundation in 1948 have neither been successful in regime change nor in preventing nuclear programme. The most discussed instances of failed sanctions involve China and Iran (Carswell 1981). Evidently the discussion on cases of sanctions provides competing narrative and contested versions about the utility and efﬁcacy of sanctions. Sanctions debates The literature presents contestations about the utility and efﬁcacy of sanc- tions. The contemporary sanctions debates owe heavily to Hufbauer, Schott, and Elliott ( 1985) who examined instances of sanctions globally to conclude that success ratio of sanctions to be low but somewhat effec- tive. Based on a study of 115 cases of sanctions, they ﬁnd that sanctions were successful in 34 per cent of the cases. In a revised study, Hufbauer et al. ( 2009) having expanded the number of cases to 170, show that the success rate of sanctions have fallen over time, from about 50 per cent before 1970 to about 33 per cent in the 1990s. The measurement of the efﬁcacy of sanctions, however, has faced almost insurmountable paradoxes since then. To wit, the differences in evaluation of sanctions have stemmed from difﬁculties in operationalising and measuring success or failure of sanc- tions, as well as theoretical conceptualisations. Re-evaluating the 1990 edition of the Hufbauer, Schott, and Elliott (hereafter HSE) dataset, Robert A. Pape ( 1997) argues that the HSE study is ﬂawed as none of the claimed 40 successes stand up to scrutiny. Out of HSE’s 115 cases, only 5 are appropriately considered successful by Pape. He further argues

152 S. SEN AND Z. MAHMOOD that modern states are willing to incur high costs in pursuit of their objec- tives and multilateral cooperation is unlikely to improve effectiveness of sanctions (Baldwin and Pape 1998). Therefore, in most cases, it is exceptionally difﬁcult to deﬁne what constitutes success and failure for sanctions policies, considering the myriad of instrumental and non-instrumental reasons for which they can be imposed (Early and Cilizoglu 2020). Further, simply identifying when coercive sanctions episodes begin can be challenging because the mere threat of sanctions can change the target state’s behaviours. Such challenges are matched by the complexity of accounting for the varied economic, political, and humanitarian costs for the states that impose them, their target state(s), and even third parties. Importantly, the efﬁcacy of sanctions as a non-violent means to resolve disputes has also been questioned. Allen ( 2008) points out that sanc- tions increase poverty, raise unemployment, and result in poorer health for citizens in the affected nation. Sanctions also increase the likelihood of anti-government activity, which may include an uptick in violent action such as rioting (Peksen 2009). Sanctions may also have counterproduc- tive effects when targeted against particular actions that a target state may perceive to be indispensable for its survival, such as the proliferation of WMDs (Early 2012). Relatedly, there is extensive debate on the necessary qualities or criteria for successful/unsuccessful sanctions. Theoretically, sanctions are imposed on a target country by a sender to bring about some form of change in policy or action. The issues that may trigger sanctions can range from geopolitical disputes to the improvement of human rights (Morgan, Bapat, and Kobayashi 2014). The pathway of sanction traverses from economic cost to political acquiesces. Sanctions inﬂict economic damage on the target state usually by restricting trade, ﬁnancial transactions, and freezing assets of that state. Contemporarily, travel bans and personal sanctions to speciﬁc individuals in the target state have been issued to avoid collateral damage on the whole population in the target country (Hufbauer et al. 2009). Intuitively, the success of sanctions depends on the extent of economic cost imposed on the target, which in turn depends immediately on the size and scope of the sanction, and non- proximally, on factors such as economic structure, social and political conditions. Further, sanctions are relational in nature and the power differential between sender and target are crucial to their success. Despite the unanimity on the broad characteristics relevant for sanction success,

9 ‘IDEALIST’S DREAM OR REALIST’S CUDGEL’: EXAMINING … 153 there is a signiﬁcant disagreement on individual characteristics or quali- ties of sanctions, as well as the economic, social, and political conditions which are necessary for their success. To begin with, the HSE dataset (1985) infers that sanctions which are comprehensive with clear objectives, supported by a coalition of sender states have better odds of success (Mudler 2022). However the argument that comprehensive sanctions are more likely to succeed has been ques- tioned, time and again, on ethical, economic, and political grounds which is why in recent years instead of comprehensive sanctions with negative externalities, the idea of smart sanction has been advocated (Kirshner 1997;W e i s s1999;D r e z n e r2011; Biglaiser and Lektzian 2011; Blackwill and Harris 2016). In a later work, Hufbauer et al. ( 2009) suggest that sanctions tend to be most effective when the goals are relatively modest, imposed quickly and decisively, the target is economically and politically weaker than the sender and there exist substantial trade relations between the two. Clearly there is lack of unanimity on the conditions which have evolved over time. In other dimensions, the idea of sanctions backed by a coalition as being more powerful and effective is well accepted. Theoretically, sanc- tions imposed unilaterally may leave room for the target state to reduce their impact by turning to alternative markets and by using counter- strategies ranging from import substitution to smuggling (Hovi, Huseby, and Sprinz 2005; Smeets 2018). It has been argued by some scholars that sanctions supported by multiple nation-states have better chances of success (Bapat and Morgan 2009). However, the condition of multina- tional sanctions runs opposite to the need for quick and decisive sanctions (Early 2011) as the ability to conjure a sanction alliance depends on the nature and type of sanctioning states, the issues of sanction, not least, the vagaries of the international order. Evidently, the effectiveness of sanctions depends on two very basic variables: domestic political-economy conditions and external reliance for trade and ﬁnance of both the target and sender states (Blackwill and Harris 2016; Mulder 2022). Economic sanctions are usually unsuccessful if targeted against another powerful state. Conversely, sanctions are more likely to be successful when the cost is signiﬁcant for the target state (Drezner 1999) or when the sanction issue is of low importance therein (Ang and Peksen 2007). Aside from economic conditions, the politics of the states in a sanctions case is also relevant in determining outcomes.

154 S. SEN AND Z. MAHMOOD Sanctions are likely to succeed when target states are friendly or demo- cratic, rather than inimical or autocratic—as the latter tend to be more resilient and can absorb economic pressure by simply transferring it to their populations. Such states either suppress any consequent discontent or use it to rally nationalist sentiments (Hovi, Huseby, and Sprinz 2005). Thus, sanctions can both destabilise targeted regimes or strengthen them, depending on regime types, domestic dynamics, and the sanctions designs (Ozdamar and Shanin 2021). Furthermore, insofar as the international system of states is concerned, the relationship between sanction and interdependence is not unidirec- tional (Mulder 2022). On the one hand, sanctions are likely to be more effective in an interdependent world, whereby trade and exchange among national economies create vulnerabilities that can be exploited by sanc- tions regimes. The end of the Cold War and the renewal of ﬁnancial globalisation have structurally transformed the erstwhile bipolar inter- national system from brief unipolarity to multipolarity, thereby altering the very context of sanctions. Sanctions in a networked and interde- pendent world have become more precise and sophisticated (Early and Cilizoglu 2020). However, an interdependent and networked world constrains the powers of the nation-state, as the primary actors in sanctions. Globalisation expands the scope for private actors such as multinational and transnational corporations—that control vast majority of global production, dominate global trade, and determine the distri- butional consequences of international trade—that may not be driven by states’ political agenda (Mahmood 2017). Ergo, interdependence can also, on the obverse, increase the difﬁculties and costs of imposing sanctions, not least, those associated with the possibility of conjuring a sanctions alliance. The discussion on sanctions reveals that intensity and impact of sanctions vary across senders and targets, depend on the type and scope of sanctions, sender-target relationship, and the degree of power disparity (Ozdamar and Shanin 2021). Thus analysing the utility and efﬁcacy of sanctions as geoeconomic instruments requires a contextual reading. Following J. David Singer’s (1961) well-known schema of International Relations, it may be possible to contextualise sanctions at the level of the international system, the national state level, and the individual level. Certain historical and geopo- litical facts pertaining to all three levels may be brought together to form the political context of sanctions. For reasons of the technolog- ical revolution, globalisation, and the consequent shrinking of the world,

9 ‘IDEALIST’S DREAM OR REALIST’S CUDGEL’: EXAMINING … 155 the international system has, of late, been marked with tremendous complexity. The context of the present global strategic environment informs the present inquest into the utility and efﬁcacy of sanctions. Examining sanction success and failure Any effort to identify and evaluate the bases of contemporary utility and efﬁcacy of sanctions warrants a theoretically informed and methodologi- cally robust framework. A word on methodology is thereby warranted. First, the post-Cold War epoch informs the temporal framework of the inquiry, since the very political context of sanctions have undergone irreversible changes. The end of bipolarity and emergent multipolar world has meant that veto points in the world decreased for a brief period post- 1990 but then increased with the assertion of countries like China and Russia. Second, since the 1990s, there have been three chief sanctioning enti- ties in global politics that comprise the bulk of global sanctions—the US, the European Union, and the United Nations. The inquest shall nomi- nally focus on these entities as the ‘sanctioner’ or ‘sender’, for they have variously and repeatedly resorted to comprehensive and/or targeted sanc- tions on speciﬁc regimes and/or activities to elicit changes ranging from particular policies to entire regimes; not least, a few of the ‘sanctioned’ entities/activities overlap the domains of unilateral, multinational, and international sanctions that have emanated respectively from the US, the EU, and the UN. Finally, as regards the choice of approach and the bases for evaluating the utility and efﬁcacy of sanctions, the inquest shall resort to interpre- tivism, chieﬂy for adhering to the spatial limitations of the present volume. In this regard, the case study method may be followed, with the choice of limited cases from which inferences can be drawn, and generalisation reached on the utility and efﬁcacy of sanctions. Bearing in mind the choice of sanction senders, a plethora of cases open up from which selection can be made based on the overlaps of sanction types, and geographical or issue-based representation across the spectrum of geopolitics. Using this logic, North Korea may serve as an Asian case of unilateral and international sanctions where all the three sanctioning entities— mentioned above—have participated simultaneously against the target state and/or its leadership; secondly, Venezuela may serve as a Latin American case of multinational sanctions, where the US and the EU have

156 S. SEN AND Z. MAHMOOD simultaneously sanctioned the Venezuelan state and/or its leadership; and third, Egypt may serve as an African case of multinational sanctions, where the EU had sanctioned its former President and several other entities and had to drop the sanctions regime only recently, in the light of its abject failure. Furthermore, since following a standardised set of assumptions and criteria for evaluating efﬁcacy has often led to negative consequences— adduced previously—the present inquest shall remain agnostic regarding these, and instead, advocate a modicum of methodological individualism. It shall attempt to understand whether success in the following sanctions cases is to be evaluated based solely on particular outcomes appertaining to the speciﬁc case in point, or if certain tangible generalisations are possible, by means of abstraction. Whatever the inferences, the present inquest does not aim to arrive—within its limited scope—at a general theory of sanctions utility and efﬁcacy. Analysing Sanctions: Select Case Studies North Korea The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (DPRK) has, over the years, faced sanctions from the US, the EU, and the United Nations. North Korea has faced international sanctions primarily due to its pursuit of nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles ostensibly to ensure security from perceived threats emanating from the US military bases in the region and joint military exercises conducted by the United States and its allies. Initially ratifying the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty (NPT) in 1985, but withdrawing in 2003—citing American aggression—North Korea conducted its ﬁrst nuclear test in 2006. Efforts to denuclearise North Korea through bilateral and multilateral negotiations since the 1990s have largely failed. The Singapore Summit (2018) between President Donald Trump and Kim Jong-un led to the suspension of high-proﬁle military exercises but did not yield substantive steps towards denuclearisa- tion or sanctions relief. Subsequent negotiations in 2019 ended without agreement, and missile testing escalated (Nishizawa, Duan, and Albert 2022). The UN has imposed the most signiﬁcant sanctions on North Korea, obligating all UN member states to enforce them. These sanctions aim to deter North Korea’s weapons development, restrict access to resources

9 ‘IDEALIST’S DREAM OR REALIST’S CUDGEL’: EXAMINING … 157 and technology, block prohibited activities, and leverage negotiations. They cover various aspects of North Korea’s WMD programme, including nuclear, missile, biological, and chemical weapons. Financial sanctions involve closing North Korean correspondent accounts, prohibiting ﬁnan- cial services, bulk cash transfers, and halting investments and joint ventures. Sectorial sanctions target North Korean exports, including coal, iron, textiles, and seafood. Transportation and shipping restrictions include vessel inspections and impoundments, bans on North Korean- ﬂagged vessels, and restrictions on landing rights and overﬂight rights for North Korean aircraft. Humanitarian assistance is allowed under the sanctions. The United States has imposed additional unilateral sanctions on North Korea, targeting a wider range of individuals and businesses, as well as entities in China and Russia supporting North Korea’s weapons programmes, cyber-attacks, human rights abuses, censorship, and money laundering (U.S. Department of State n.d.). North Korea was designated a state sponsor of terrorism from 1988 to 2008 and was relisted in 2017. The European Union, along with Australia, Japan, and South Korea have also variously imposed sanctions on North Korea, having expanded these in response to North Korea’s missile testing and other provocations. These measures include asset freezes, trade restrictions and limitations on entry, investment ban, and remittance caps (Stangarone 2021). While sanctions aim to curb North Korea’s weapons programme, their effectiveness remains a subject of debate, as it continues missile testing. The UN sanctions have signiﬁcantly impacted North Korea’s economy, leading to a sharp decline in GDP and trade since 2016. Despite this, some indicators like stable commodity prices and exchange rates suggest that the sanctions’ economic effect may not be as robust as anticipated. Although the pandemic had further worsened the humanitarian situa- tion, North Korea could also manage to evade some sanctions through illicit trading routes—especially with China, exceeding imposed quotas for reﬁned petroleum imports and ﬁnding ways around bans on coal, iron, and seafood exports (Frank 2018; Stangarone 2021; Nishizawa, Duan, and Albert 2022). The unilateral non-proliferation sanctions by the US have so far had a negligible impact on the North Korean nuclear programme. Critics argue that the unilateral sanctions need stronger enforcement—which is not possible given North Korea’s closed economy and polity, also for Chinese and Russian intervention as ‘sanctions busters’—hurt ordinary families

158 S. SEN AND Z. MAHMOOD instead of elites, and embolden the regime to continue nuclear devel- opment based on the interpretation that additional sanctions are a threat to regime survival. The latter ordinarily entails further belligerence, such as increasing missile testing (Nishizawa, Duan, and Albert 2022). Overall, experts believe sanctions alone may not effectively deter North Korea’s nuclear programme. Some argue that North Korea, due to its relations with China and South Korea, sustains foreign trade, thereby alleviating the pressure from UN sanctions (Kim and Martin-Hermosillo 2013). Additionally, North Korea’s command economy weakens the impact of these sanctions, and it is also unlikely for South Korea—since it shares borders with North Korea—to impose harsh sanctions due to concerns about a refugee inﬂux. Ineffectual sanctions have, therefore, led to escalated tactics, potentially escalating tensions. Thus, using sanc- tions that are likely to fail may increase risks and costs for coercing states, pushing them towards more forceful measures. Others contend that North Korea evades international sanctions by establishing state trading companies (STCs). These entities, operating within legal and illegal realms, procure goods on behalf of the regime. The STCs serve as the linchpin in North Korea’s efforts to bypass inter- national sanctions. Following signiﬁcant events such as the sanctioning of Banco Delta Asia (BDA) in Macau, Premier Wen Jiabao’s visit to North Korea in 2009, and the succession of Kim Jong-un in 2011, North Korea, Inc. underwent a transformation, deepening its integration into China and regional economic centres. Consequently, with China as its ‘sanc- tions buster’, North Korea sought new partners and ﬁnancial instruments beyond the reach of the US Treasury Department. Thus, North Korea’s procurement methods have evolved over time, adapting to new barriers and market conditions. The regime has turned to private Chinese ﬁrms and middlemen, expanded its operations within China, and diversiﬁed procurement pathways through regions like Hong Kong and Southeast Asia. These adjustments have allowed North Korea to maintain a degree of resilience in the face of sanctions (Park and Walsh 2016). Venezuela The primary entities imposing sanctions on Venezuela include the United States, the European Union, and Canada, with some Latin American nations also implementing restrictions on high-ranking ofﬁcials from Venezuela’s government. The United States initiated its sanctions more

9 ‘IDEALIST’S DREAM OR REALIST’S CUDGEL’: EXAMINING … 159 than a decade ago, initially as a response to non-compliance with poli- cies related to drug trafﬁcking, illegal gold mining, terrorism, and human trafﬁcking. The US justiﬁed its sanctions by citing a multitude of factors, including the authoritarian regime led by Nicolas Maduro, allegations of extrajudicial killings by security forces, and widespread corruption. As protests continued and the Venezuelan government’s repression escalated, the US expanded its sanctions under President Trump. These measures included limiting the Venezuelan government’s access to US debt and equity markets, prohibiting transactions involving digital currency, and restricting purchases of Venezuelan debt. In 2019, the US banned inter- actions between American individuals and companies with the Maduro government, imposing secondary sanctions on third-country parties (Seelke 2023). The EU joined the sanctions regime in November 2017 by implementing an arms embargo, freezing assets, and imposing travel bans on individuals linked to repression (Roy 2022). The impact of sanctions on Venezuela can be observed across various sectors, including hydrocarbons, manufacturing, agribusiness, and gold mining (Rodríguez 2022). In 2017, ﬁnancial sanctions exacerbated disparities in ofﬁcial and black-market exchange rates, leading to a decline in oil production and exports. The subsequent trade restrictions in 2019 further burdened the country as the US market closed its doors to Venezuelan production, causing a signiﬁcant loss of revenue. The consequences of these sanctions extended to the widely expropriated agri- cultural sector, which was already grappling with hyperinﬂation, currency scarcity, military control, and corruption. Manufacturing sector had a history of dependence on oil-related activities and the sanctions led to difﬁculties in accessing credit from abroad. The sanctions also restricted access to raw materials which further impacted production. Not least, the sanctions’ impact extended to the emerging gold mining industry, as the government sought to expand it in response to economic challenges, but paradoxically fostered an alliance between itself and criminal organisations and guerrilla groups. Overall, the sanctions, in conjunction with pre- existing economic challenges, exacerbated Venezuela’s economic crisis. They prompted shifts in economic behaviour, from the use of alterna- tive currencies to the emergence of informal channels, adding complexity to the nation’s economic landscape (Rosales 2019; Rodriguez 2022). To understand the impact and the possible success of the sanc- tions regime, it is important to view Venezuela as a rentier economy, where revenue from oil extraction is redistributed through subsidies and

160 S. SEN AND Z. MAHMOOD currency overvaluation to various sectors (Bull and Rosales 2020). This inﬂux of rent income from abroad is pivotal for the nation’s political insti- tutions and social organisations. By the time sanctions were imposed, Venezuela had regressed into a defensive authoritarian rentierism, util- ising oil rents primarily to sustain the ruling government and suppress opponents. The sanctions have disrupted established avenues of rent appropriation, thereby, diminishing the capacity to leverage oil rents due to severed external ﬁnancing, hindering the transfer of oil and gold into rents, and impeding the ability of individual actors to accumulate rent. The Venezuelan case underscores several critical points highlighted in the literature on sanctions. Firstly, sanctions have led to the informali- sation and criminalisation of the Venezuelan economy (Bull and Rosales 2020). Secondly, sanctions have been imposed in isolation, sometimes conﬂicting with other diplomatic strategies such as negotiations and multilateral diplomacy. This fragmented approach has limited their effec- tiveness, as countries like Cuba, Russia, Turkey, and China have exploited opportunities as ‘sanctions busters’ (Smilde and Ramsey 2020). Thirdly, while the causal link is complex, sanctions have coincided with a deep- ening of authoritarianism. Sanctions are generally less effective against authoritarian regimes, and they often contribute to more autocratic governance (Rosenberg, Goldman, Drezner, and Julia 2016). Finally, in this case, the distinction between targeted and comprehensive sanc- tions is blurred due to Venezuela’s heavy dependence on oil and state control. While both sanctions and mismanagement likely contributed to the economic collapse, it is crucial to recognise the multi-causal nature of these issues. Furthermore, in practice, sanctions have rarely resulted in regime change, as their effect on the Maduro administration in Venezuela could adduce. The primary goal of some of the targeted sanctions has been to induce political change and restore the functioning of democratic institu- tions. However, achieving consensus on the legitimacy of the Maduro government and the extent of international intervention has proved challenging. The speciﬁc demands for lifting sanctions on the Maduro government remain unclear: after initially demanding Maduro’s resig- nation, the US policy took a backﬂip with the Biden administration’s statements emphasising the need for negotiations and democratic solu- tions (Rodriguez 2022). Thereafter, the governing elite have adapted by transferring control to key constituents—particularly military ofﬁ- cials—in sectors with access to foreign currency and mineral extraction.

9 ‘IDEALIST’S DREAM OR REALIST’S CUDGEL’: EXAMINING … 161 This has fostered loyalty among these constituents, thereby raising the costs of defection. The informalisation and criminalisation of operations as a result of prolonged sanctions have, therefore, provided alternative means of survival for both the Venezuelan government and business enti- ties, diminishing the incentives for the constituents to turn against their principles. Egypt The European Union’s targeted sanctions on pre-Arab Spring Egyp- tian state authorities is a particularly interesting case, for it reveals the contradictions of the complex web of targeted, multinational sanctions, and the domestic political will aimed at recovering ﬁnancial assets that were systematically expropriated from the national exchequer. Restrictive measures were initially adopted in 2011—at the backdrop of the Arab Spring—and aimed notably at assisting post-Arab Spring Egyptian author- ities with the recovery of misappropriated state assets. The measures consisted of an asset freeze imposed on the assets of the listed individuals located in the EU. In addition, nationals from the EU member states and legal entities incorporated in the EU were forbidden from making funds available to the listed individuals, either directly or indirectly. Since 2011, the targeted sanctions have been reviewed on an annual basis, with some individuals having been delisted over time (Council of the EU Press Release 2021). In the aftermath of the revolution, Egyptians were hopeful of bringing back the billions of Euros purportedly stolen by President Hosni Mubarak and his family, to invest them in building a new Egypt (CIFAR 2017). President Mubarak was investigated for allegedly misappropriating public funds and was convicted by the Egyptian authorities for the same. His wealth was reported to be concealed in France, Germany, and Spain. The EU had deployed targeted sanctions against the former president and his family, thereby disbarring them from accessing the funds which were reportedly stashed in European banks (Transparency International 2022). As the post-revolution political landscape began to change throughout the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) region, the EU’s targeted sanctions against Mubarak as well as those against former Tunisian pres- ident Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali were due to expire on 31 January 2016. These were subsequently renewed upon the premise that despite early promises, post-revolution governments in the MENA region had made

162 S. SEN AND Z. MAHMOOD little or no progress, as their efforts focused largely on regime survival rather than reform. As a result, corruption had thrived, despite the best intentions of transitional governments which, the advocates of EU sanc- tions surmised were therefore in need of the Union’s sanctions regime to overcome domestic ﬁnancial malpractices (Transparency International 2016). The EU’s sanctions regime related to the misappropriation of Egyptian state funds was aimed at promoting the objectives of the EU- Egypt partnership in the context of the Common Foreign and Security Policy (Council of the EU Press Release 2021). Notwithstanding the EU’s high rhetoric in justifying the sanctions, the political will in Egypt to prosecute members of the Mubarak circle— to prove that corruption had indeed led to asset theft—was very weak. Although by mid-2015 the transitional government had created the so- called truth-ﬁnding committees to that effect, and some of Mubarak’s assets were indeed frozen, none of these were conﬁscated and returned to Egypt. These committees, moreover, were not independent from the Egyptian government, and were soon mired in the political turmoil and interferences facing the latter. Since 2017, it had also become stark that the basis upon which restrictive measures were slapped on the Mubarak family were provided by the transitional Egyptian government in a hurry—without the necessary preparation of resources and legal mate- rials requested by the European states—which brought to a rejection of most of the asset recovery requests (CIFAR 2017). As regards the prosecution and sentencing for corruption, the neces- sary requirement of most foreign jurisdictions is to prove that the assets held in their countries were stolen through crime. Although Mubarak and his sons were convicted in the notorious ‘presidential palaces case’ for embezzling USD 17.9 billion, those cases could not be linked to the asset recovery legal assistance request, since investigations on how the vast wealth of the Mubarak family was funnelled abroad never took place. Moreover, under President Al-Sisi, Egypt’s anti-corruption legisla- tion took an unexpected turn through the amendment of the illicit gains law, whereby, the government allowed reconciliation with the purport- edly corrupt elements of the Mubarak administration in exchange for returning some of the stolen assets (CIFAR 2017). Meanwhile, Mubarak and other sanctioned entities had already appealed to the EU General Court in 2011. After a decade-long legal battle—culminating in a judgement only after Mubarak’s death in 2020— the EU General Court (Ninth Chamber) ruled in favour of the applicants.

9 ‘IDEALIST’S DREAM OR REALIST’S CUDGEL’: EXAMINING … 163 The Court conﬁrmed the unlawfulness of the EU sanctions against Mubarak and his family, allowed his living heirs access to the funds in European banks, and ordered the Council of the European Union to pay back any costs the family incurred in the proceedings (Judgment of the General Court 2022). Pre-empting the judgement of the General Court, the EU revoked the Egyptian sanctions regime and delisted nine people, citing paradoxically, in its ofﬁcial press release that ‘following the most recent review of the nine listings still in force, the Council concluded that the regime had served its purpose’ (Council of the EU Press Release 2021). The experts, however, have had a completely different take on the issue: ﬁrst, that the EU Council’s inability to pursue suspected cases of misappropriation of Egyptian public funds with due process has set a worrying precedent; second, that the setback has come when klep- tocracy has been plundering public resources, undermining democracy, and provoking instability globally; and ﬁnally, that the proposed EU reforms must address its asset recovery legislation to improve trans- parency, thereby ceasing to be an attractive destination for dirty money (Hatter in Transparency International 2021). Whatever may be the suggestions, this failed case of restrictive measures on Egyptian enti- ties reveal at once the vacuity of targeted, multinational sanctions when issued in the dearth of consensus among the sanctioning states, as well as the reduced efﬁcacy of these measures when posited on a political system that lacks the necessary will for ensuring ﬁnancial transparency and accountability. Conclusion: Whether or Whither Sanctions? The brief discussion on three different sanction episodes illuminates the utility and efﬁcacy of sanctions and in this section we draw on the lessons. Examining the experiences of sanctions in three different situations, in the context of permacrisis lends us towards a conceptual model of ‘polit- ical settlement of sanctions’. The utility and efﬁcacy of sanctions depends on speciﬁc political dynamics engendered by the systemic complexity of the international system; characteristics of target countries’ regime and economic condition; and the commitment and clarity of the sanction and the senders. It is the triad of systemic, domestic and sanction characteris- tics that create unique ‘sanction settlement’ that determines their efﬁcacy and utility. Intuitively, we emphasise that no strict set of universal criteria

164 S. SEN AND Z. MAHMOOD can be applied to infer efﬁcacy, as the international system is in a state of permacrisis, not least, as all cases are intrinsically different due to domestic political variables, also issues of motives and intents of states locked in sanctions contests. As the North Korea case study shows sanctions have battered its economy and prevented its prospects of ever joining the mainstream of international politics, however, these have failed to prevent nuclearisa- tion and/or institute regime change, especially due to the presence of ‘sanctions busters’ and existential threat to the regime which makes it reti- cent to international concerns. The Venezuela case shows another form of sanction buster. Sanctions have impacted the Venezuelan economy, but the consequent informalisation and criminalisation of operations as a result of prolonged sanctions have provided alternative means of survival for both the Venezuelan government and business entities, diminishing the efﬁcacy of sanctions. The Egyptian case reveals the vacuity of targeted, multinational sanc- tions when issued in the dearth of consensus among the sanctioning states, as well as the reduced efﬁcacy of these measures when posited on a political system that lacks the necessary will for ensuring ﬁnancial transparency and accountability. The US non-proliferation sanctions on North Korea and other nuclear aspirants have either completely failed or were revoked, not least, all of these have fallen short of achieving their desired objectives. It reveals that aside from the level of commitment and consensus among senders, the reason, type of sanctions, attribution, and desired objectives are critical to the success of sanctions. The cases also highlight the importance of domestic conditions in the target country’s economy and politics. States possess the capacity to navi- gate the repercussions of non-compliance, provided they have the means to do so. In the selected instances, sanctioned states had the ability to withstand the economic impacts. In the case of Venezuela, sanctions were accompanied by the informalisation and criminalisation of the national economy, while North Korea’s relatively stable economy, combined with a stable dollar-won exchange rate, enabled it to maintain domestic prices for essential commodities like rice, corn, and petroleum. The lack of domestic opposition strength in the respective sanc- tioned countries prevented political pressures on the regime. In some countries, opposition lacked the necessary popularity or strength (as in the case of the US-backed Juan Guaidó in Venezuela), and in North Korea, opposition does not exist or is unable to sustain itself due to the

9 ‘IDEALIST’S DREAM OR REALIST’S CUDGEL’: EXAMINING … 165 overwhelmingly autocratic nature of the government. Further sanction objectives of regime change involve considerations of nationalistic fervour. Even in the face of repression, economic collapse, and corruption, citi- zens may ‘rally around the ﬂag’ to maintain leadership in the hands of existing leaders, rather than allow a leader inﬂuenced by a foreign inter- vening state to take power. It is imperative to note that the act of sanction involves subjective connotations shaped by subjective interpretation and meaning-making practices, for the countries imposing sanction and the target countries. In sum, evaluation of the utility and efﬁcacy of sanctions based on their impact on altering state behaviour, must consider the triad of systemic, domestic and sanction characteristics that create unique ‘sanc- tion settlement’. These include states’ economic circumstances, such as its access to domestic ﬁnancial resources, international ﬁnancial networks; their external relationships and ability of manoeuvring the ever-changing landscape of global politics and internal conﬁguration and dynamics of political power. All these elements collectively shape the success or failure of a sanction. References Aldrich, W.W. 1967. The Suez Crisis - A Footnote to History. Foreign Affairs 45 (3): 541–552. Allen, S.H. 2008. The Domestic Political Costs of Economic Sanctions. Journal of Conﬂict Resolution 52 (6): 916–944. Ang, A.U.J., and Peksen D. 2007. When do economic sanctions work? Asym- metric perceptions, issue salience, and outcomes. Political Research Quarterly , 60(1), 135- 145. Baldwin, D.A., and R.A. Pape. 1998. Evaluating Economic Sanctions. Interna- tional Security 23 (2): 189–198. Bapat, N.A., and C.T. Morgan. 2009. Multilateral Versus Unilateral Sanctions Reconsidered: A Test Using New Data. International Studies Quarterly 53 (4): 1075–1094. Biglaiser, G., and Lektzian, D. 2011. The Effect of Sanctions on U.S. Foreign Direct Investment. International Organization , 65(3), 531–551. Blackwill, R. D., and Harris, J.M. 2016. War by Other Means: Geoeconomics and Statecraft. Harvard University Press.

166 S. SEN AND Z. MAHMOOD Bull, B., and Rosales, A. 2020. Into the shadows: sanctions, rentierism, and economic informalization in Venezuela. European Review of Latin Amer- ican and Caribbean Studies , 109, 107–133. https://www.jstor.org/stable/ 26936905. Carswell, R. 1981. Economic Sanctions and the Iran Experience. Foreign Affairs 60 (2): 247–265. Charter of the United Nations and Statute of the International Court of Justice . 1945. https://treaties.un.org/doc/publication/ctc/uncharter.pdf. Coates, B. 2019. A Century of Sanctions. Origins: Current Events in Histor- ical Perspective . https://origins.osu.edu/article/economic-sanctions-history- trump-global?language_content_entity=en. Drezner, D.W. 1999. The Sanctions Paradox . Cambridge University Press. Drezner, D.W. 2011. Sanctions Sometimes Smart: Targeted Sanctions in Theory and Practice. International Studies Review 13 (1): 96–108. Early, B.R. 2011. Unmasking the Black Knights: Sanctions Busters and Their Effects on the Success of Economic Sanctions. Foreign Policy Analysis 7( 4 ) : 381–402. Early, B.R. 2012. Not a Double-Edged Sword: Why U.S. Economic Sanctions Encourage the Pursuit of Nuclear Weapons, but Can’t Prevent Their Acqui- sition, Social Science Research Network . https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers. cfm?abstract_id=2224013. Early, B.R., and Cilizoglu, M. 2020. Economic Sanctions in Flux: Enduring Challenges, New Policies, and Deﬁning the Future Research Agenda, Inter- national Studies Perspectives , 21(4), 438–477. Egypt: EU revokes sanctions framework and delists 9 people. 2021, March 12. Council of the European Union Press Release. https://www.consilium.eur opa.eu/en/press/press-releases/2021/03/12/egypt-eu-revokes-sanctions- framework-and-delists-9-people/. Egypt: European Union’s Lift of Hosni Mubarak Sanctions Signals Impunity for those Accused of Corruption. 2022. Transparecy Interna- tional. https://www.transparency.org/en/press/egypt-european-unions-lift- of-mubarak-sanctions-signals-impunity-for-corrupt-actors. Egypt’s (modest) efforts to bring back Mubarak’s billions. 2017. CIFAR. https://cifar.eu/egypt-efforts-mubarak/. Farrell, H., and A.L. Newman. 2019. Weaponized Interdependence: How Global Economic Networks Shape State Coercion. International Security 44 (1): 42– 79. Frank, R. 2018. Economic Sanctions against North Korea: The Wrong Way to Achieve the Wrong Goal? Asia Policy 13 (3): 5–12. Galeotti, M. 2021. The Weaponization of Everything: A Field Guide to the New Way of War . Yale University Press.

9 ‘IDEALIST’S DREAM OR REALIST’S CUDGEL’: EXAMINING … 167 Hovi, J., R. Huseby, and D.F. Sprinz. 2005. When Do (Imposed) Economic Sanctions Work? World Politics 57 (4): 479–499. Hufbauer, G.C., and Oegg. B. 2001. A Short Survey of Economic Sanctions . Peterson Institute for International Economics. Hufbauer, G.C., Schott, J.J., and Elliott, K.A. 1985. Economic Sanctions Reconsidered. Institute for International Economics. Hufbauer, G.C., Schott, J.J., Elliott, K.A., and Oegg, B. 2009. Economic Sanctions Reconsidered . Peterson Institute for International Economics. Judgment of the General Court (Ninth Chamber). 2022. https://curia.europa. eu/juris/document/document.jsf?text=&docid=257421&pageIndex=0&doc lang=en&mode=req&dir=&occ=ﬁrst&part=1. Kelerchian, G. 2014. The Signiﬁcance of the Russian Campaign of the Napoleonic Wars. The Histories 1(1). Kim, S.H., and M. Martin-Hermosillo. 2013. The Effectiveness of Economic Sanctions Against a Nuclear North Korea. North Korean Review 9 (2): 99– 110. Kirshner, J. 1997. The microfoundations of economic sanctions. Security Studies 6 (3): 32–64. Kolhatkar, S. 2022. Will Sanctions Against Russia End the War in Ukraine? The New Y orker. Kovach, A. 2015. The Fallacy of Nonviolent Economic Sanctions. The Downtown Review 2( 1 ) :1 – 9 . LeoGrande, W.M. 2015. A Policy Long Past Its Expiration Date: US Economic Sanctions Against Cuba. Social Research , 82(4), 939– 966. Mahmood, Z. 2017. Globalization and labour reforms: The politics of interest groups and partisan governments . Oxford University Press. Morgan, T.C., Bapat, N., and Kobayashi, Y. 2014. The Threat and Imposition of Sanctions: Updating the TIES dataset. Conﬂict Management and Peace Science , 31(5), 541–558. Mulder, N. 2022. Economic Weapon: The Rise of Sanctions as a Tool of Modern War. Yale University Press. Nishizawa, L., Duan, A., and Albert, E. 2022. What to Know About Sanctions on North Korea. Council on Foreign Relations . https://www.cfr.org/backgr ounder/north-korea-sanctions-un-nuclear-weapons. Nonproliferation Sanctions. (n.d.). U.S. Department of State . https://www. state.gov/key-topics-bureau-of-international-security-and-nonproliferation/ nonproliferation-sanctions/. Ozdamar, O., and E. Shanin. 2021. Consequences of Economic Sanctions: The State of the Art and Paths Forward. International Studies Review 23 (4): 1646–1671. Pape, R.A. 1997. Why Economic Sanctions Do Not Work. International Security 22 (2): 90–136.

168 S. SEN AND Z. MAHMOOD Park, J., and Walsh, J. 2016. Stopping North Korea, Inc.: Sanctions Effectiveness and Unintended Consequences. Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Tech- nical paper . http://web.mit.edu/ssp/people/walsh/Stopping North Kore- aInc. ParkWalsh_FINAL.pdf. Peevers, C. 2014. The Politics of Justifying Force: The Suez Crisis, the Iraq War, and International Law . Oxford University Press. Peksen, D. 2009. Better or Worse? The Effect of Economic Sanctions on Human Rights. Journal of Peace Research 46 (1): 59–77. Rodriguez, F. 2022. Sanctions, Economic Statecraft, and Venezuela’s Crisis: Case Study. The Fourth Freedom Forum, Sanctions & Secu- rity Research Project . https://sanctionsandsecurity.org/wp-content/uploads/ 2022/01/January-2022-Venezuela-Case_Rodriguez.pdf. Rosales, A. 2019. Radical rentierism: Gold mining, cryptocurrency and commodity collateralization in Venezuela. Review of International Political Economy 26 (6): 1311–1332. Rosenberg, E., Goldman, Z.K., Drezner, D., and Julia, S. S. 2016. The new tools of economicwarfare: effects and effectiveness of contemporary U.S. ﬁnancial sanctions. Center for a New American Security. Roy, D. 2022. Do U.S. Sanctions on Venezuela Work? Council on Foreign Relations. https://www.cfr.org/in-brief/do-us-sanctions-venezuela-work. Sanchez, O. 2003. The Sanctions Malaise: The Case of Cuba. International Journal 58 (2): 347–372. Seelke, C.R. 2023. Venezuela: Political Crisis and U.S. Policy. Congressional Research Service . https://sgp.fas.org/crs/row/IF10230.pdf. Sigmund, P .E. 1974. The ‘Invisible Blockade’ and the Overthrow of Allende. Foreign Affairs 52 (2): 322–340. Singer, J.D. 1961. The Level-of-Analysis Problem in International Relations. World Politics 14 (1): 77–92. Smeets, M. 2018. Can Economic Sanctions be Effective? World Trade Organiza- tion. Smilde, D. and Ramsey, G. 2020. International peacemaking in Venezuela’s intractable conﬂict. European Review of Latin American and Caribbean Studies, 109, 157–179. https://www.jstor.org/stable/26936907. Stangarone, T. 2021. Removing Sanctions on North Korea: Challenges and Potential Pathways. United States Institute of Peace: Special Report, 504 . https://www.usip.org/sites/default/ﬁles/2021-12/sr-504-rem oving-sanctions-on-north-korea.pdf. Transparency International Calls on EU to keep Sanctions on Tunisia’s Ben Ali and Egypt’s Mubarak. 2016. Transparency International . https://www.tra nsparency.org/en/press/transparency-international-calls-on-eu-to-keep-sancti ons-on-tunisias-ben-al.

9 ‘IDEALIST’S DREAM OR REALIST’S CUDGEL’: EXAMINING … 169 Weiss, T.G. 1999. Sanctions as a Foreign Policy Tool: Weighing Humanitarian Impulses. Journal of Peace Research 36 (5): 499–509. Whang, T. 2011. Playing to the Home Crowd? Symbolic Use of Economic Sanctions in the United States. International Studies Quarterly 55 (3): 787–801.

CHAPTER 10 Leverage in Energy Security: Weaponising For Good and Bad Cauvery Ganapathy “Those engaged in trade with each other Do not shoot at one another” (Wintour 2022)* The combination of stresses in the international environment that coalesced to form the permacrisis of this decade, has ampliﬁed concerns over the politics of energy security. The geopolitics of energy has been a permanent ﬁxture in international relations predating the last century, so, this is not to suggest a return, much less a revival, of the subject. The value of energy resources, and easy access to them, as a currency of strategic power, has been consistent over two centuries now. What has not, however, remained the same is the nature of this cur rency, and the changing signiﬁcance of state and non-state actors who *German Chancellor Helmut Schmidt speaking to President Jimmy Carter, March 5th, 1980 C. Ganapathy (B) Dubai, UAE e-mail: ganapathy.cauvery@gmail.com © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapor e Pte Ltd. 2024 O. Mishra and S. Sen (eds.), Global Political Economy, Geopolitics and International Security , https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-97-2231-0_10 171

172 C. GANAPATHY transact in it, whether as sellers, buyers or intermediates. What ascribes novelty to the concerns over the subject in the era of permacrisis is that it stands today at an unprecedented intersection of having to grapple with record high consumption of fossil fuels despite having to countenance the persistent and ever-mutating problems of these old forms of energy, while simultaneously struggling to push forward the clean energy tran- sition, through the deployment of renewables largely, in a manner that would cut the cords with the old ways as much as possible. 2023 could be considered an inﬂection point by virtue of the fact that the world’s consumption of fossil fuels has been the highest ever recorded,1 while at the same time having the highest number of dramati- cally ambitious clean energy goal commitments by the maximum number of countries being made within the same timeline. While the prognosis of devastating climate change, and the impact and direct contribution the use of fossil fuels has on it, should have been the catalyst, it is the perma- crisis that have greatly aggregated and accelerated, if not induced in some measure, a fundamental shift in global energy security dynamics. Despite the dichotomies in the pursuit of more ambitious clean energy targets at the same time as increased fossil fuel consumption, the net result of the permacrisis has been the creation of a signiﬁcant, even if unintended, alignment between security and environmental concerns where energy security is concerned, and in so doing, it has engineered a paradigmatic shift in the global energy landscape. The purpose of the chapter is to draw out the broad contours of just such overarching impacts that the permacrisis have had on the ﬁeld of energy geopolitics, while taking cognisance of the inherent dichotomies, and potential for a repetition of old errors in the domain. The chapter intends to do this by focusing on three broad areas of concern. First, a possible weaponisation of energy resources, both enhanced and compounded by increasing interdependence in the age of permacrisis; second, consider how the fact of such weaponisation is likely to change or may already have changed geopolitical dynamics or reinforced existing conﬁgurations in international relations; third, how likely it is that this state of play from fossil fuels will be passed on as a legacy issue into 1 Given the COVID-19 lockdowns and the suppression of demand and reduced economic activity and output, the previous data recorded to be referenced would ideally be that of 2019; the resultant pent-up demand post the easing of COVID-19 restrictions must also be accounted for.

10 LEVERAGE IN ENERGY SECURITY: WEAPONISING … 173 the pathways of new energy transitions through monopolies of resource access, supply, transit, technological dominance or processing capabilities. It would be prudent to limit the scope of this chapter to the pandemic’s timeline or the outbreak of the war in Ukraine and the fallouts most easily attributable to it. Yet there is very little in international relations that operate through such neat silos or in along a simple linear pathway. This is much less in the case of a timeline that has experienced a global pandemic that left no country, domain or industry unaffected. As such, major global issues such as the sheer inability of international organisations to reform in time or the global ﬁnancial crisis of 2008, remain as relevant to the points of origin and scale of the permacrisis of 2022–23 as do the repercussions of a dogged global pandemic or a return of war to Europe with signiﬁcant ramiﬁcations across continents. The upheavals in the traditional moor- ings of international geopolitics and geoeconomics, triggered through a coincidence of multiple developments, many of which could be traced to the enduring but insidious impacts of partially resolved or unresolved legacy complexities of the past, have contributed towards compounding an already mendacious maze of international relations. Further compli- cating that maze is a most perseverant retinue of global issues ranging from a fast deteriorating security situation in Asia and the wider Indo- Paciﬁc, a vividly perceptible realisation that climate change and its impacts are an existential problem here and now, instead of being a long-term policy consideration/projection alone, to the depressing consistence of the internecine conﬂicts in Syria, Yemen and now parts of Africa leading to concerning regularity and levels of human migration, all the while grap- pling with the growing tendency to try and fortify national boundaries while faced with the truism of unavoidable interdependence. Energy poli- tics of the last decade needs to be contextualised in the midst of this cacophony of varied crises. Weaponisation of Energy Resources and Access Barriers Energy geopolitics of states has been directly impacted by one or more elements of what may be identiﬁed as the permacrisis spanning the last decade, and none more so than the Russian invasion of Ukraine just as the world was recovering from the most devastating global pandemic. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has had wide-ranging ramiﬁcations on global food, energy and security calculations. For all intents, along with the

174 C. GANAPATHY lasting impact of the pandemic, this particular act by Moscow could be singled out as among the chief trigger-points of what we today recognise as the permacrisis. While no reference to its abundant fossil fuel resources has been made by Moscow itself in the purported reasons for this act of aggression, energy can be reasonably identiﬁed as being central to the calculations that were made in both, the lead-up to the war, as well as Russia’s projections for the counter-response. The value of those abun- dant energy resources would be more relevant still to Moscow’s ability to stand its ground for a much longer-term regardless of any tactical victories in the war itself. Now, energy is a strategic commodity (Mu 2020). By that token alone, the leeway that countries can make for disruptions or deliberate attacks on other imported goods, do not apply to energy. Fulﬁlment of energy requirements, if not guaranteed sufﬁciency in it, lies at the nub of a state’s food security, economic security and by extension, national security matrix. The counter-response to any tendency or act to weaponise such a strategic commodity, then, is expectedly and understandably stringent and signiﬁcant. The weaponisation of energy is not a new phenomenon. The efforts to weaponise its control over hydrocarbon resources by a state which is rich in it have several examples with the Iranian oil embargo of 1979 being the one with perhaps the greatest long-lasting impact in terms of the geopolitical changes it triggered. The weaponisation of it by Russia, though, appears poised to be one of equal, if not much greater, signiﬁ- cance in the long term. Expectations that the Russians would weaponise their leverage by virtue of energy trade, over Western Europe is more than four decades old now (Mark Davis, 2016). And, yet, when the most robust wielding of this weapon came, Europe was as unprepared as it appears to have been naively sanguine with the arrangement four decades ago (Wintour 2022). The efforts to weaponise its control over hydro- carbon resources by a state which is rich in it, has typically led to an immediate search for supplanting of that actor by ﬁnding alternatives to them, in addition to the imposition of sanctions to limit their presence in the interdependent international milieu. This has happened in the cases of Iran, Venezuela as well as Saudi Arabia at times, in some instances more easily than in others. This option, however, becomes that much more challenging when the actor to be replaced is the world’s largest oil and natural gas exporter, and far more crucially, the state with the largest

10 LEVERAGE IN ENERGY SECURITY: WEAPONISING … 175 stockpile of tactical nuclear weapons in the world (Arms Control Associ- ation 2023), and with a land-border congruous with more than half of Europe. Given this background, Europe’s willingness to become part of an interdependent matrix with Russia to the degree it did in the energy sector was a perplexing strategic miscalculation of mammoth proportions. Winston Churchill’s prescription about the safety and certainty of energy supplies lying in the diversiﬁcation of source alone (Yergin 2006) appears to have fallen by the wayside in Europe’s willingness to tie its fortunes, and more importantly its national security, to an overarching dependence on Russia. Prior to February, 2022, Europe procured nearly 50% of its gas imports (accounting for 40% of its total gas supplies) and 25% of its oil from Russia (Bloomberg News 2021). Even more glaring is the fact that this dependence on the Russians was for the form of energy which constituted EU’s principal baseload capacity generator. The reasoning behind this may have been an oversimpliﬁcation of the value of interdependence. The EU’s rationale for this, apart from the simple math of cheaper logistics, a comfortable pricing mechanism (Bloomberg News 2021) and the reduction of reliance on the seemingly more volatile Middle Eastern and OPEC sources, could most understand- ably have been the consideration that forging interdependence situates a country in the economic and national security calculus of the other, and this, in turn, induces a degree of rational behaviour by establishing a stake in the welfare of the other. The expectation, then, is that this would inoc- ulate both countries from an irrational act or aggressive motivations on the part of the other. What this calculation/assumption does not make an adequate correction for is that the other actor may be counting on this very same interdependence to inhibit the ability of the recipient state to mount a counter-response. That interdependence regulates relations between states and reduces the value of aggression (Keohane 1990) while prioritising trade and cooperation is a tenet which needs multiple quali- ﬁers to apply to the Realist mode of states, and the case of Russia is no different. Ralph Norman Angell in his Nobel prize winning work ‘The Great Illusions’ (Angell 1933) had laid out the fundamental precept upon which Helmut Schmidt’s conviction that when nation-states become econom- ically interdependent, the cost–beneﬁt analysis of going to war would establish it as being a wholly undesirable exercise. What Angell did not, however, account for are elements of strategic calculations based on

176 C. GANAPATHY ideologies, differing worldviews and readings of history, domestic polit- ical concerns and the baggage of unresolved issues from the past, which do not immediately appeal to a rational explanation. Interdependence affects world politics but as Keohane and Nye point out in their seminal work, it is governments that decide on those patterns of interdependence (Keohane and Nye 2012), which in turn opens that decision-making agency to multiple unquantiﬁable considerations, not all of which may be rational. To think of economic interdependence as benign (Keohane and Nye 2012) when underlying ideological issues fester alongside funda- mentally differing readings of history and conﬂicting aspirations for the future, would tantamount usually then, to an expensive folly. The Russians had, in fact, reduced their energy supplies to Europe prior to February 2022 in what could be interpreted as an effort at exerting leverage. Russia not sending enough gas to Europe in 2021 may have been a way to restrict supplies such that Europe’s response to any aggressive intent on Moscow’s part (Sheppard et al. 2022) would be muted. Given that there is evidence now to suggest that by March 2021 (Kramer 2021), President Putin had made up his mind regarding the invasion of Ukraine in the coming spring, the decision by the Russians to reduce the supply of gas to Europe, could well account for a case of energy blackmail. The very fact that the sanctions regime put in place post the Ukraine invasion, to a large degree manoeuvred to keep Russian oil and gas out of the fold, is testament to the power of energy as a resource and to a validation that Russia’s gamble based on the strength of its status as an energy superpower paid off, even if in part. The very nature of sanctions and the counter-responses it triggers is central to how acts of the weaponisation of energy resources have been launched and conducted (Mark Davis 2016). While the Russian invasion of Ukraine may have had as some part of its calculation the consideration that it already enjoyed sufﬁcient leverage over the EU which would insulate it from the consequences of its aggres- sive intent, the very foundational motivations of the NATO should have been enough to disregard this being a serious consideration. Further- more, Vladimir Putin’s own contentions (Sullivan 2022) suggest that, the potential expansion of NATO was a motivating impulse above and beyond any economic calculation he may have made on the question of the value of Russia’s status as an energy superpower suffering, in the lead- up to the invasion of Ukraine. There is, though, some value in pointing out that EU and NATO’s reaction to the takeover of the Crimea in 2014

10 LEVERAGE IN ENERGY SECURITY: WEAPONISING … 177 may well have led the Russians to believe they had greater currency of inﬂuence over Europe by virtue of their energy dependence on Russia. Furthermore, Putin’s violation of the Budapest Memorandum of Security Assurances, 1994, by which Russia promised to never use military force or economic coercion against Ukraine, Kazakhstan and Belarus, itself could be seen as the ﬁrst shot ﬁred in this disagreement between the two sides, which has now snowballed into the crisis over Ukraine. The weaponisation of energy in the context of the Russian invasion of Ukraine is not restricted to Moscow’s calculations of the leverage it enjoyed over the EU, but in fact found an equally, if not more, disturbing manifestation in the blowing up of the Nord Stream pipeline, arguably the poster-child of erstwhile energy cooperation between the Russians and their European neighbours. In the very existence of the Nord Stream pipeline was inherent an assumption of cooperative security. The attack on the Nord Stream is a classic example of how vulnerable energy coop- eration can be to changes in strategic calculations despite the indisputable value of it to national security and sustenance, more so now that evidence regarding the involvement of a pro-Ukraine group in the attack on what effectively was the energy lifeline of the country’s European allies in this war against the Russians, has been discovered (The Economist 2023). In addition to the sabotage of the Nord Stream pipeline, the targeted Russian onslaught against the energy infrastructure of Ukraine is testa- ment to the centrality of energy security in a conﬂict, regardless of whether it began with or is aimed at energy per se. No European energy system, including the ones damaged in the First and Second World Wars, has seen the kind of targeted destruction that the Ukrainian system has borne since February 2022 (Task Force April 2023). Within a very short time of launching the war, Russia systematically destroyed nearly 50% of Ukraine’s installed power capacity and decimated its oil reﬁning industry, in addition to effectively uprooting the country’s laid energy infrastruc- ture in the form of transmission lines and distribution networks (Task Force May 2023). The attacks on Ukraine’s energy infrastructure came in just as evidence of Russian involvement in the outages of the Caspian Pipeline Consortium began to show. This targeting of energy infrastruc- ture, is part of a long dubious practice among state and non-state actors to disrupt and gain strategic advantage at the cost of a country’s energy systems, and by that token, its national security. In attacking Europe’s energy infrastructure, whether through physical destruction such as in the case of Ukraine, or through disruptions as in the case of the EU,

178 C. GANAPATHY Russia partakes in a list of notoriety among petrostates which weaponise not just their energy resources but also their points of access to those resources once procured by a buyer or even one independently owned by another state (Wintour and Borger 2019). Iran’s signiﬁcance to the international market, for instance, has as much to do with its undeniable clout of control over the Strait of Hormuz through which a substantial part of international trade passes, as it does to the natural resource wealth Tehran sits on. It is a leverage that Iran holds and values, and one that every country that has its energy supplies passing through the Hormuz chokepoint remains vulnerable to. Whether Russia has been able to achieve the goals it set out to achieve through the use of energy as a weapon in the case of the Ukraine inva- sion would beneﬁt from an ex-post analysis. On the face of it, though, the Russians, it would appear, have exhausted the most prized weapon in their arsenal of political and strategic leverage over the Europeans for the moment. Russia’s actions having come at substantial economic costs, ties in with Mearsheimer’s contention that regardless of the degree of relative security and prosperity born of the interdependence of the status quo, ‘the rational desire to achieve regional hegemony in an anarchic inter- national environment’ (Mearsheimer, 1990), is a natural instinct among states, despite how irrational the calculation may appear from the outside. That the energy insecurity of a partner or an adversary has a real impact on the national security of a country, and therefore matters leading to such a state of affairs must not be allowed to transpire, much less be precipitated, then, is an expectation that does not hold much water within the inherently anarchical international system. Russia’s obvious economic losses and the kind of devastation that the Russian economy, society and general international status has suffered as a result of the war, is a throw- back to Alfred Mahan’s counter-response to Angell (Rühle 2019)i nt h a t there are seemingly irrational and unquantiﬁable factors that cause leaders and states to act on the impulse of going to war despite the considerable costs of it or the absence of any obvious or lasting beneﬁts from it. As with any strategic commodity, the weaponisation of energy has been a two-way street. The demand generators/buyers hold as much of a sway as the producers/suppliers. Although the desperation for energy resources means that the buyers are the ones that would suffer more typically in the absence of trade, it is equally true that many of the petrostates that have the energy resources as the mainstay of their economies cannot stay aﬂoat in the absence of such trade, so, while they are energy-abundant, they

10 LEVERAGE IN ENERGY SECURITY: WEAPONISING … 179 are not by a long measure self-sufﬁcient. The strategic nature of energy resources and its trade has led to its wielding often being conducted through proxy and through apparently disconnected steps. The energy production and pricing disagreement between the Russians and the Saudi Arabians that began in March 2020, for instance, in a complete rebuttal of the understanding the two had reached in 2016 to control the price and market share of their most lucrative exports, is indicative of the kind of impasse that can build over geopolitical calculations that have little to do with the economics of the energy market itself. Sanctions are a particularly complicated part of the toolkit in the gamut of counter-response to an act of weaponisation of energy resources and trade. The exemptions of the sanctions regime in the case of the Ukraine war and the fact that countries like the US and the UK, as primary leviers of those sanctions, could still access processed fuel that was being bought off the Russians by the Indians at considerably subsidised rates, for one, is evidence of how grey these areas of operation can be. The strategic nature of energy as a scarce commodity means that consensus on withholding trade in it is a rare phenomenon. Oftentimes, sanctions on an energy supplier may be made for an entirely different concern, far removed from the ideological or even hard security matters that seem to be the main triggers for the act, and may in fact be based on more domestic economic considerations (Jensen-Eriksen 2017). This, in turn, translates into an omnipotent buyer and seller market with changes only in the participant list. This naturally compromises the ability of coun- tries to establish a fool-proof non-porous sanctions regime or lend such an act any effective credibility. If it does ever succeed, in the manner it was made possible brieﬂy in the case of Iran, then that would have a more reasonable impact on the country in question, to the extent of inﬂuencing its policy even if never really altering it. Absent such an effective compre- hensive sanction on the seller, the weaponising of energy by the buyer would not work, thereby resting the leverage safely with the producer/ seller more often than not. New Pathways to Counter the Weaponisation of Energy Wars and crises have a way of clarifying objectives, national, regional and global. Energy-related crises in the earlier decades typically saw a movement towards supplementing, if not supplanting, the problem- atic supplier, given that being held hostage to such weaponisation of

180 C. GANAPATHY a strategic resource can be powerful motivator. The permacrisis of this decade, however, has largely accelerated the movement towards replacing the very forms of energy that hold nation-states hostage. A fundamental shift has taken place in the patterns of energy demand and supply over the last decade. To be certain, this shift has been nearly three decades in the making, but the grand changes could more easily be traced to a more manageable timeline within the last decade, and could arguably be estab- lished as having accelerated post the pandemic and alongside the war in Ukraine. This repositioning within the energy security narrative is under- girded by three speciﬁc and largely inter-related developments—ﬁrst, the increasing commitments to green energy transitions by countries around the world having increased substantially over the last decade, with the most ambitious ones having been announced since the end of the pandemic and the outbreak of the war in Ukraine. To be fair, while the weaponisation of energy by Russia and the scarcities and supply chain disruptions born of it could be counted as contributing factors, they are only a part of a long litany of concerns that triggered this movement; second, the movement towards this new form of energy creates a new energy superpower in the form of China, supported by Russia and the countries of Africa which are rich in rare earths, metals and minerals. Finally, there is a signiﬁcant change in where the maximum demand for energy now emerges from, and this is a paradigm altering shift wherein the drivers that determine the demand and supply dynamics both, then, are naturally different from those of the present. This last development, effectively, changes the narrative on what quali- ﬁes as energy security. It expands the scope of the qualifying elements that decide on energy security being met by addressing the need for devel- oping countries to meet their emissions targets while addressing their economic growth and societal access issues in the most viable and afford- able manner. These countries routinely have to contend with the fact that what has security beneﬁts could also have inﬂationary tendencies, and that consideration alone can alter many of the calculations of the energy security debate. The main drivers of demand today are in Asia, a shift from the traditional bastions of demand generation of the last century. Further, countries that have traditionally been buyers of energy have become suppliers of oil for the ﬁrst time in nearly seven decades, for instance, with the US becoming a net exporter of oil for the ﬁrst time in 75 years by the end of 2018. While this change in the locus of demand

10 LEVERAGE IN ENERGY SECURITY: WEAPONISING … 181 generation has changed over the last decade, the architecture that under- writes the conduct of such energy trade, and all related interface between nation-states, has remained largely unchanged. The Ukraine war and the pandemic, in many ways, have helped with pushing forward the debate over the need for new international insti- tutional architectures that would be more representative and responsive, and this has been most pronounced in the spheres of climate change, debt restructuring and energy security. In so doing, the permacrisis has created an alignment of security and climate change needs as also the economic logic for a form of energy to be the most practical option. It is also a natural progression along a pathway that can trace its momentum to a few takeaways from the pandemic. The unfortunate combination of a pandemic and a war has led to three discoveries having emerged as a trifecta of assaults on the combination of national interest and secu- rity compulsions and the climate change redressal targets of countries. First, the struggle of the Global South for vaccines during the pandemic demonstrates the inability of the developing world to partake in what should have arguably been a universally accessible right, by virtue largely of not having a seat at the decision-making tables due to the very consti- tution of international decision-making infrastructure nor the ﬁnancial wherewithal to bypass international regulatory mandates; second, the supply chain bottlenecks of the time, which meant being able to afford did not necessarily translate into being able to access energy resources from outside the country; and, third, the invasion of Ukraine by the world’s largest exporter of oil and natural gas, which wreaked havoc on the energy and food security calculations of the Global South while upending the long-term clean energy transition blueprints of European countries. In concert, these three developments combined to create a national security dilemma for the Global South that exacerbated the environmental concerns that had already begun plaguing it—arguably with more imme- diate and noticeable ramiﬁcations than the countries of the Global North appeared to be facing. The one positive outcome of this insecurity matrix was a growth in the combined global vision that a move away from hydrocarbons was no longer a choice but a necessity, if only to insulate countries from the vagaries and political machinations of energy trade. The search for alternatives to the hydrocarbon resources whose unequal distribution entrenches monopolies, has undoubtedly been accelerated by the fallout from the Russian invasion of Ukraine. Trading routes,

182 C. GANAPATHY trading patterns and international investment ﬂows have also been dras- tically altered following both the pandemic and the Russian invasion of Ukraine. On the issue of energy security itself, in the short-term though, growing fears of scarcity and supply chain disruptions, has revived the preference for fossil fuels more, despite the movement towards clean energy commitments growing in many countries. The net result of this has not been just a rebound in fossil fuel consumption and unprecedented levels of demand spike, but also a considerable degree of urgency in the procurement of these resources. Simultaneously, however, the urgent imperative of having to substitute what is now an unreliable supply of hydrocarbon resources from what was the world’s largest exporter of oil and natural gas prior to February 2022, has also meant a scramble for seeking hydrocarbon resources from alternative sources, at least in the short to medium term, in a manner that has increased the price advan- tage as well as political clout of other producers of oil and other fossil fuels. It has been a curious dichotomy of pushing forward with the most ambitious green energy transition targets while at the same time trying to scour every available point of fossil fuel import by countries that are dependent on fossil fuels. The return to fossil fuels has been desperation- driven in an environment where governments are trying to cushion the multiple lags in growth and inﬂation that were triggered by the long- term economic fallouts from the pandemic and the war in Ukraine. This, however, is expected to be a temporary adjustment, which signiﬁcantly will lead to the peak of energy production. The International Energy Agency had assessed that at the cost of economic growth, the pandemic would result in a 5% decline in energy demand in 2020 with a largely concomitant decline of 7% in global greenhouse gases (IEA 2020).2 2 These ﬁgures must be contextualised with the fact of the pandemic restrictions and that economies increased their growth with a resultant pressure brought to bear on the amount of energy being used and the greater amount of GHGs being released into the atmosphere. This does not, however, take away from the fact of markedly increased demand impulse based on increased economic activity.

10 LEVERAGE IN ENERGY SECURITY: WEAPONISING … 183 Old Follies in the New Pathways Although it is true that entrenched complications in national life and the international circumstance present an opportunity for visionary transfor- mations, it becomes an enormously challenging task to manoeuvre when the pulls on a state’s ﬁnite resources and largely well-entrenched strategic partnerships ﬁnd themselves at odds with each other. It is important to factor in that a lot of countries cannot afford to plan on the basis of long-term economics and that they need instead to plan based on their affordability index today. This has always been the case for countries navi- gating the geopolitics of energy, and never more so than in this age of seemingly unending permacrisis. Massive shocks can, however, trigger positive outcomes, even if they count for something only in the long term. There could be a push for innovation, useful employment generating indi- genisation, or even more open and efﬁcient government systems. What the spike in the prices of fossil fuels effectively does is make the most effective case for the search and consolidation of alternative forms of fuel which would be more cost-effective, and most importantly, make the case for a new energy architecture. The energy architecture of the future needs to remain vigilant against the inequities of the past, to begin with. The co-relations that can, and must, be drawn between the growing willingness among countries of the Global South to try and carve out an international agenda and objec- tive which differs from the older construct of the liberal international order and the failure of the international organisations to reform in time and become more agile in their responses to global inequities of access, agency and sheer power at a time when the circumstance of countries are markedly different from when these institutions were ﬁrst created, are signiﬁcant. The primary tests for the success of the clean energy transitions and in ensuring that it does not repeat the mistakes of the international fossil fuel economy would come down to two issues—the ﬁrst, a democratisation of the entire process and value chain which must begin at the level of funding, with International Climate Finance being placed at the centre of the agenda; and, second, actively ﬁghting against the tendencies of perpetuating monopolies in the value chain. A lag or failure on either of these two counts would negate any progress towards moving away from the cascading problems of the fossil

184 C. GANAPATHY fuel economy exempliﬁed by the war in Ukraine and the scarcities of the pandemic. First, on the issue of funding, because clean energy has to contend with discretionary demand and price sensitivity in a manner that fossil fuels have not had to, due to the lack of viable alternatives, pricing schemes and the ﬁnancing for the renewable energy projects play an oversized role in the deployment of renewable energy. It is pertinent, in this context, to highlight the role that the private sector can play in the ﬁeld of transition ﬁnance. Despite the very value of such investment emerging from the fact that it may be privately raised, and therefore carry with it lesser bureau- cratic obligations, it is equally true that private players would expectedly base their decisions on a regulatory structure that could incentivise such investment. So long as renewable energy remains tied to non-essential produc- tion, it will suffer, and it will remain so unless it is integrated into the behemoths of an economy such as the construction and fertiliser indus- tries—both, signiﬁcantly large chunks of the economy in the Global South. It becomes that much more important, then, to incentivise the acceleration of clean energy deployment and equally important that the energy architecture that is built this time maps out the issues of de-risking investment. As part of this effort, it is necessary to factor in the challenge of seeking the mobilisation of capital at a time of disquiet and ﬂux. Rudi- mentary risk assessments would call for a signiﬁcantly higher degree of caution at such a time. What becomes important then, is for insurance mechanisms, nationally and internationally, to assess and underwrite risk in a manner that would moderate the level of aversion to it, given the strategic importance of expanding these new energy pathways—some- thing, that appears unlikely to happen without deliberate government support mechanism and mandates. This will have to be done all the way through the value chain, namely in transmission, deployment and in storage. Furthermore, it would be useful to consider the levels of contribu- tion towards the international ﬁnance fund being more evenly distributed. There is a fundamental issue if countries that are looking at exploring more of the fossil fuels to fund their future growth are asked to bear a greater burden because that would be penalising them for a problem that was largely not caused by them. However, in order to incentivise the use of cleaner forms of energy, it may help to offer tax-subsidies to countries when they are seeking to import the inputs required, and

10 LEVERAGE IN ENERGY SECURITY: WEAPONISING … 185 make the transfer of technology an easier process. The differential in such an arrangement could then be borne by the climate fund that would be established under the auspices of this new energy architecture. A provision such as this could tie in neatly with the Just Energy Transition Partner- ships announced by Indonesia during the G20 in November 2022. In a signiﬁcant re-arrangement of traditional constructs of the energy security architecture, the oil-rich petrostates of the Gulf have begun an important transformation. The role that the Sovereign Wealth Funds of countries such as the UAE and Saudi Arabia are playing in underwriting the massive funding commitments towards the deployment of renewable energy, even as they continue to monetise their strategic fossil fuel resources, is the kind of parallel track that would enable the transformation of the energy architecture of the world in the most viable manner. For the developing countries of the Global South, what has compounded the dysfunctional dynamics of the oil and gas markets, marked by volatility, disruptions, price and value ﬂuctuations and a general lack of reliability, has been disjointed planning and a lack of well- spaced investment in clean energy projects even if the gestation periods are relatively long. It would be useful to consider the value of nuclear energy projects in this context. In addition to addressing all of the above listed concerns, nuclear energy has the beneﬁts of guaranteeing clean energy with a baseload capacity, a factor that is non-negotiable to the growth potentials of the developing countries. Beyond the implications for the GHG emissions and the health of the planet, a signiﬁcant fact that commends the growth of decentralised forms of renewable energy path- ways is that reducing a country’s dependence on hydrocarbons would to a large degree help insulate it from the vagaries of international energy politics. In addition to possessing these merits, it is the value of nuclear energy to cater to industrial production and manufacturing which could make the best case for its use (León 2023). It commends itself more due to its imperviousness to market ﬂuctuations and its promise of reliable grid-scale low-carbon energy which can be more decentralised. The second issue of concern in the hopes for a cleaner, democratic and more equitable system of energy security internationally, is to guard against the tendency towards monopoly creations. One of the principal verticals in the inherent shift in the global energy landscape is the unchal- lenged position it will accord China. By virtue of its control over rare earth minerals with 60% of production and nearly 85% of processing

186 C. GANAPATHY capacity, China is poised to single-handedly assume the combined rele- vance of all the petrostates and the OPEC countries to the traditional fossil fuel-powered economy of the previous century. Signiﬁcantly, nearly 55% of the world’s addition of renewable energy generation in the year 2022–2023 came from China alone (IEA 2023). Further, China enjoys a monopoly over the production of cheap membranes used in solar panels being purchased by most of the world. A combination of these three factors places China right at the centre of the clean energy transition 3 and the Climate Change agenda of the world. The concern with monopolies created in the previous energy systems should naturally apply to in this case too, for fear of this position being weaponised in the future, given the natural expectation of interdependence to exist in the new arrangement too. China has previously held dependent states hostage over critical minerals supplies, as it did with Japan (Bradsher 2010). It promises to do so again if the proclamations of the Regulations on Rare Earths Manage- ment 2021 (Shunshuke 2021) and the restrictions imposed on the export of gallium and germanium, announcements that were noticeably timed with US Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen’s visit to China in mid-2023, are any indication. In addition to China, it is Russia, with a control of nearly 17% of the world’s high-grade nickel production (Chin et al. 2022), a metal that is central to producing the batteries that stand at the heart of the EV revolution, which holds an important position in the ‘new energy economy’. Importantly, the role of African countries such as the DRC, Zimbabwe and Namibia which are endowed with substantial reserves of rare earths offers perhaps the best chance for a meaningful transfor- mation in the international energy architecture. Such a change would be conditional on the African countries cooperating to leverage their combined contributing capacity in the exploration, mining, production and trade of rare earths in a manner that could maximise value addition (Baskara, 2022) through the entire production chain, both upstream and downstream. It is essential that the mistakes of the past not be repeated in the clean energy transition. Yet, the fact that one country appears poised to be placed right at the centre of the emerging energy architecture, with overwhelming control over the domain, can reasonably be projected as a 3 The carbon footprint of the purported clean energy transition itself is worth a more incisive look.

10 LEVERAGE IN ENERGY SECURITY: WEAPONISING … 187 precursor to the new battle lines for the weaponisation of energy resources being drawn (Hammelehle 2023). The fruition of this possibility would see the fault lines of the past exacerbated, and the failure to guard against this repeat of history would nullify every other progress made under the new energy architecture. Coordinating and systematically integrating the efforts towards a sustainable transition across the different policy imperatives, such as the simultaneous but not always congruous commitments, that policy-makers would have towards clean energy as well as land and water use patterns or maintenance of forest cover, for instance, is essential to the enter- prise of clean energy transitions. Ensuring complementarity among these differing agendas needs to be an essential element in moving forward with a more systematic effort towards integrating clean energy options into any national energy policy. This is necessary due to concerns that the transition pathways that governments commit to, particularly when the commitments have been triggered by an external shock, tend to adversely impact national goals in areas of just energy distribution, sustainable food production and efforts to secure biodiversity (Tran and Egermann 2022). Unless synergies are established and the planning towards this transition is better integrated (Tran and Egermann 2022), the pulls and pressures in different, and often conﬂicting directions would continue. Although each of the pulls that governments are having to answer to in the process of transition, are all essential concerns, yet, the struggle between multiple commitments may dilute the original starting point of the effort to supplant or transition, particularly, given assessments that suggest a low Return on Investments (RoI) on renewable energy projects in many countries, particularly in the Global South. It is then, the task, of a society and polity to prioritise from among the varying agendas. It would be prudent to consider the qualitative elements that differen- tiate fossil fuels from the clean energy options in order to judge it more fairly and draw maximum beneﬁts from it. Among the primary draws of renewables and clean energy options is the kind of access it can bring to territorially remote and marginalised communities and populations, and this aspect alone should commend its value to any policy-making in the sphere, apart from the undeniable urgency and compulsions of Climate Change. Given that the permacrisis affect the marginalised more disproportion- ately, it will be necessary that the new energy architecture prioritise the issues of energy access, energy equity, environmental justice and climate

188 C. GANAPATHY change mitigation means. It is critical that the Global South’s struggle for equitable and reliable access to energy be positioned centrally in the international community’s quest for clean energy transitions and sustain- able emission targets. Locating the question of energy access, and working on realising this as a universal right would offer the most progressive agenda under this new energy architecture. Studies have estimated that getting about 1.2bn people presently bereft of it, equitable access to energy between 2023 and 2030, would cost $35bn/year (IRENA 2023), while getting access to clean cooking means for 3bn people living without it would cost $25bn/year (Culver 2022). These are fantastical sums of money, and such mobilisation of ﬁnance can only emanate from a place of recognising that everyone has a stake, albeit, some more than others. There is a fundamental equitability in the new energy pathways simply by virtue of them are not being dependent on the random distribution of natural resources. Lessened asymmetry in resource distribution does not, however, automatically translate into a veritable equitability in access to those resources. While comparative advantages (Kyriakopoulou et al. 2023) will continue to play an inordinate role in where the chips fall in this new energy landscape, the attendant reconﬁguration under this new architecture offers the Global South its best chance yet at redeﬁning parameters of energy security that work for them. References Angell, N. 1933. The great illusion 1933. Heinemann. Arms Control Association. 2023, June. Nuclear weapons: Who has what at a glance. https://www.armscontrol.org/factsheets/Nuclearweaponswhoh aswhat. Baskara, G. 2022, December 29. Could Africa replace China as the world’s source of rare-earth elements? https://www.brookings.edu/articles/could-africa-rep lace-china-as-the-worlds-source-of-rare-earth-elements/. Bradsher, K. 2010, September 22. Amid tensions, China blocks vital exports to Japan. https://www.nytimes.com/2010/09/23/business/global/23rare. html. Chin, Y. et al. 2022, March 9. Nickel prices sent on wild ride by Russia-Ukraine war . https://www.wsj.com/livecoverage/russia-ukraine-latest-news-2022-03- 08/card/nickel-market-sent-on-wild-ride-by-russia-concerns-oepHo6J9PSox NNoOCbZf. Culver, L. 2022, October 31. Energy transition: Unique issues for developing economies. Stanford Energy Group Seminar.

10 LEVERAGE IN ENERGY SECURITY: WEAPONISING … 189 How Europe Became Too Dependent on Putin for Its Gas. 2021, November 10. Bloomberg News. https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021- 11-10/how-europe-has-become-so-dependent-on-putin-for-gas-quicktake. Global Energy Demand to Plunge This Year as a Result of the Biggest Shock Since the Second World War. 2020, April 30. IEA. https://www.iea.org/ news/global-energy-demand-to-plunge-this-year-as-a-result-of-the-biggest- shock-since-the-second-world-war. Hammelehle, J. 2023. Energy security: Refueled. https://securityconference.org/ publikationen/munich-security-report-2023/energy-security/. Keohane, R. 1990. International liberalism reconsidered. In The economic limits to modern politics, ed. J. Dunn, 165–194. Cambridge University Press. Keohane, R.O., and J. Nye. 2012. Power and interdependence. Longman. Kramer, E. A. 2021, April 9. Russian troop movements and talk of intervention cause jitters in Ukraine. https://www.nytimes.com/2021/04/09/world/ europe/russia-ukraine-war-troops-intervention.html. Accessed September 23, 2023. Kyriakopoulou, D. et al., 2023, June 12. How does climate change impact on international trade? https://www.lse.ac.uk/granthaminstitute/explainers/ how-does-climate-change-impact-on-international-trade/#:~:text=Climate% 20change%20is%20affecting%20prospects,restrict%20people%27s%20ability% 20to%20travel. León, B. 2023, January 13. Nuclear energy is vital to ensuring energy security and an affordable, sustainable, and resilient energy system now and for the future. In Derentz, L. et al. (eds.), The 2023 global energy agenda. https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/content-series/global-ene rgy-agenda/the-2023-global-energy-agenda/#nuclear. Mark Davis, C. 2016. The Ukraine conﬂict: Economic-military power balances and economic Sanctions. Post Communist Economies, 28(2): 167–198. https://doi.org/10.1080/14631377.2016.1139301. Mearsheimer, J.J. 1990. Back to the future: Instability in Europe after the cold war. International Security 15 (1): 5–56. Mu, X. 2020. The economics of oil and gas. Agenda Publishing. Renewable, power on course to shatter more records as countries around the world speed up deployment. 2023, June 1. IEA. https://www.iea.org/ news/renewable-power-on-course-to-shatter-more-records-as-countries-aro und-the-world-speed-up-deployment. Rühle, M. 2019, January 14. The end of the “Great Illusion”: Norman angell and the founding of NATO. https://www.nato.int/docu/review/articles/ 2019/01/14/the-end-of-the-great-illusion-norman-angell-and-the-founding- of-nato/index.html.

190 C. GANAPATHY Sheppard, D., Politi, J., and Seddon, M. 2022, January 12. IEA Chief Accuses Russia of Worsening Europe’s Gas Crisis. https://www.ft.com/content/668 a846e-d589-4810-a390-6d7ff281054a. Shunshuke, T. 2021. China Tightens Rare-Earth Regulations, Policing Entire Supply Chain: Stricter Export Controls Give Beijing Leverage Amid US Tensions. https://asia.nikkei.com/Business/Markets/Commod ities/China-tightens-rare-earth-regulations-policing-entire-supply-chain. Sullivan, B. 2022. How NATO’s Expansion Helped Drive Putin to Invade Ukraine. https://www.npr.org/2022/01/29/1076193616/ukraine-russia- nato-explainer. Accessed 23 Sept, 2023 Tran, T.H., and M. Egermann. 2022. Land-use implications of energy transi- tion pathways towards decarbonization—comparing the footprints of vietnam, New Zealand and Finland. Energy Policy 166: 1–19. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.enpol.2022.112951. Ukrainian Energy Sector Evaluation and Damage Assessment—IX. 2023. Task force. https://www.energycharter.org/ﬁleadmin/DocumentsMedia/Occasi onal/2023_04_27_UA_sectoral_evaluation_and_damage_assessment_Vers ion_IX.pdf. Ukrainian Energy Sector Evaluation and Damage Assessment—X. 2023, May 24. Task force. https://www.energycharter.org/ﬁleadmin/DocumentsMedia/ Occasional/2023_05_24_UA_sectoral_evaluation_and_damage_assessment_V ersion_X_final.pdf. Who Blew Up the Nord Stream Pipelines? Lots of Blame, No Hard Evidence. 2023, March 8. The economist. https://www.economist.com/the-economist- explains/2023/03/08/who-blew-up-the-nord-stream-pipelines. Accessed 20 September, 2023 Wintour, P ., and J. Borger. 2019, September 18. Saudi offers ‘Proof’ of Iran’s role in oil attack and urges US response. Guardian. https://www.thegua rdian.com/world/2019/sep/18/saudi-oil-attack-rouhani-dismisses-us-cla ims-of-iran-role-as-slander. Accessed Sept 20, 2023. Wintour, P . 2022, June 2. We were all wrong: How germany got hooked on russian energy. Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/jun/ 02/germany-dependence-russian-energy-gas-oil-nord-stream. World Energy Transitions Outlook 2023:1.5 degree Celsius Pathway, Volume 1. 2023. International renewable energy agency, Abu Dhabi. www.irena.org/pub lications Yergin, D. 2006. Ensuring Energy Security. Foreign affairs 85 (2): 69–82. https://doi.org/10.2307/20031912.

CHAPTER 11 International Security and Irregular Cross-border Migration in Times of Permacrisis Sabahat Ambreen Contemporary international security spans a broad spectrum of inter- connected concerns and threats that pose challenges for both national and human security. The major challenge for nation-states, international organisations, and other stakeholders is to reduce such threats in order to secure the safe existence of humanity. Human security encompasses more than conventional concepts of security and places signiﬁcant emphasis on the advancement and safeguarding of human rights. Moreover, the dynamics of the balance of power system have shifted from solely relying on military power to a more nuanced combination of economic and mili- tary factors. In this new paradigm, economic inﬂuence often carries more weight than military might. Furthermore, various economic tools such as trade policies, sanctions, cyber-attacks, and foreign aid are also employed S. Ambreen (B) Milli Al-Ameen College, University of Calcutta, Kolkata, India e-mail: suﬁsaba75@gmail.com © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapor e Pte Ltd. 2024 O. Mishra and S. Sen (eds.), Global Political Economy, Geopolitics and International Security , https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-97-2231-0_11 191

192 S. AMBREEN to achieve geopolitical objectives. While the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) has contributed to establishing the foundation for human security paradigm, it took over ﬁve decades for human security to emerge as a clearly deﬁned alternative to the state security model. A Historical Perspective on Security In 1982, the Independent Commission on Disarmament and Security Issues led by Swedish politician Olof Palme introduced the concept of ‘common security’ as a means to explore different perspectives on peace and security. Later on, there was a transition in the concept of security, shifting from a narrow focus on military threats and national security to a more expansive and contextual aspect. It was acknowledged that although the industrialised world was primarily concerned with military issues, the security of third world countries was jeopardised by poverty, hardship, and economic disparity. Hence, it was imperative for the developed world, namely, to address these non-military security concerns in a deliberate and purposeful manner. The approach towards human security became apparent with the publication of the 1994 Human Development Report: New Dimensions of Human Security by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) (Timothy 2004). Expanding upon the theoretical advancements in security throughout the 1980s, the Report highlighted the fact that social and economic uncertainty posed a risk to global stability. It opened with the statement that: For too long, nations have sought arms to protect their security. For most people today, a feeling of insecurity arises more from worries about daily life than from the dread of a cataclysmic world event. Most people instinc- tively understand what security means. It means safety from the constant threats of hunger, disease, crime and repression. It also means protec- tions from sudden and hurtful disruptions in the patterns of our daily life (Human Development Report 1994). The 1994 UNDP study showed that human security has two inter- related components: ‘freedom from fear’ (such as dangers arising from war, conﬂict, and state-sanctioned violence) and ‘freedom from want’ including avoidable illnesses, economic adversity, poverty, and develop- mental issues (Human Development Report, 1994). Despite on-going

11 INTERNATIONAL SECURITY AND IRREGULAR … 193 debates among experts and scholars on the importance of conceptual- ising human security in this manner, it is crucial to acknowledge that the freedom from fear and want are closely linked. In September 2000, Koﬁ Annan, the Secretary-General of the United Nations, reiterated the need for the international community to effectively accomplish the dual objec- tives of achieving freedom from fear and freedom from want. In response to the emerging issues, the Japanese government formed the Commis- sion on Human Security. This commission functioned as an independent body while maintaining strong afﬁliations with the United Nations. The Commission aimed to broaden the conventional understanding of security and shift the focus from the state to encompass ‘non-traditional’ threats. It posited that, Human security means protecting fundamental freedoms—freedoms that are the essence of life. It means protecting people from critical (severe) and pervasive (widespread) threats and situations. It means using processes that build on people’s strengths and aspirations. It means creating polit- ical, social, environmental, economic, military and cultural systems that together give people the building blocks of survival, livelihood and dignity (Commission on Human Security 2003). Precisely, the UNDP and the Commission approached human security from a human-centric perspective that emphasised a holistic comprehen- sion of development, rather than just focusing on the economic dimen- sions of an individual’s or community’s existence. They advocated for the creation of political systems that upheld individual rights, economic insti- tutions that generated employment opportunities, and inclusive cultures that rejected discrimination based on race, religion, gender, or any other arbitrary categorisation. As the Commission noted: Human security policies must consider the ﬁght against poverty as a major challenge for the international community. It is imperative to develop global strategies supporting growth and sustainable development while at the same time implementing policies of economic development and social protection at the national level (Human Development Report, 1994).

194 S. AMBREEN Irregular Migration as a Non-T raditional Security T hreat One of the most notable instances of non-traditional security concerns that the world has been encountering is irregular cross-border migration. It is widely known that international migration disregards national bound- aries and has direct implications for international security, peace-building, and developmental objectives (Van Der Linj 2019). Theoretically, irreg- ular migration refers to movement of people that occurs outside the rules, regulations, or international treaties that regulate arrival into or departure from the country of origin or destination. However, irregular migration is inherently a multifaceted problem. Irregular migration, from the view- point of transit or destination nations, pertains to the act of a country accepting, accommodating, or employing an individual who does not possess the necessary permits or documentation required by immigra- tion and labour laws. From the perspective of the countries of origin, irregularity occurs when an individual crosses an international border without a passport or any other legitimate travel document, or when they fail to meet the administrative conditions for leaving the country. There are situations in which migrants ﬁrst enter a country legally, but then become undocumented by exceeding their authorised stay or engaging in unauthorised employment. Certain individuals migrate into and depart from their country through unauthorised means. Others exhibit a state of being ‘semi-compliant’: they strive to adhere to national laws and regu- lations, but are unable to do so completely (Ozkul et al. 2012). Another complexity that arises due to irregular movement pertains to the fact that large migratory ﬂows are increasingly made up of people with ‘mixed motivations’ for travel. They may be pursuing economic advancement or escaping to avoid war, religious strife or lack of rights in the country of origin. In addition to being embroiled in conﬂicts, nations with poor governance and lack of services are more likely to ‘push’ migration for economic reasons too. Migrants’ individual motivations also inﬂuence their choice of destination. Migration both results from and can lead to human security prob- lems. Push factors like disruptions in the economic lives of individuals and their families, displacement due to environmental disasters, and polit- ical and religious persecution constitute threats to human security that drive migration on a mass scale. But the perception of migration as a threat to state/national security has certainly heightened in recent years,

11 INTERNATIONAL SECURITY AND IRREGULAR … 195 partly as the security agenda has become more prevalent across many aspects of policy, and partly in response to the rapid rise in the number of international migrants, especially ‘irregular’ migrants. The securitisa- tion of migration has become a prominent topic among academicians, policymakers, and international players, especially after the 9/11 terror incident, resulting in greater control of states over individuals and in a broader understanding of what constitutes a security challenge. Experts also argue that migration poses a threat to both human security and state sovereignty (Ullah et al. 2020). Consequently, countries are implementing a series of regulatory measures and stricter policies for documentation and its veriﬁcation. These measures affect the migrant populations disproportionately. The assumption behind such approach is that ﬂawed documentation systems may allow the free movement of terrorists and criminals, along with economic migrants who enter a state with legal documents. The imple- mentation of stricter border controls and more stringent visa regulations has led to unauthorised migrants adopting more clandestine methods while seeking ways to their intended destinations. However, the imple- mentation of stronger visa regulations frequently accelerates the growing trend of migrants resorting to unlawful pathways (Ahsan 2013). Security-Migration Nexus Extensive research has been conducted in recent decades, particularly in the area of security studies, resulting in the predominant perception of the migration-security nexus being seen primarily from national security perspective. The correlation between population dynamics and security studies is rapidly gaining attention, bolstered by the emergence of polit- ical demography as a distinct area of research in the ﬁelds of international relations and political science. Migration may have signiﬁcant implica- tions for several aspects, including state sovereignty, the distribution of power among nations, and the character of disputes in the international system. Moreover, the increase in human mobility has been linked to the formation of urban clusters for migrants, challenges with regard to a state’s ability to regulate entry into their territories, and disparities in the ethnic-religious makeup of populations. If immigrants are not assimilated into host communities, especially if they originate from a vastly different cultural milieu, there is an increased likelihood of religious and ethnic conﬂicts. This necessitates additional governmental initiatives to integrate

196 S. AMBREEN ethnic minorities into a national fabric. Based on this area of research, it has been identiﬁed that there can possibly be potential hazards for the society that hosts immigrants (Estevens 2019). According to a publication by the International Organization for Migration (IOM), in order to understand the integral link between migra- tion and security, it is important to focus on four things—security sector reform, Transnational Organised Crime (TOC), conﬂict prevention and stabilisation. An efﬁcient security sector enhances regional stability and encourages opportunities for international cooperation. It is comprehen- sive and reﬂective of the entire populace, encompassing migrants as well. It operates with openness and responsibility, which are core characteristics of good governance. Security sector reform can enhance the capacity of migrants to access justice and exercise their rights without facing bias or apprehension. The primary focus of security sector reform should be to emphasise the incorporation of safety and security measures for migrants, as well as ensuring for them easy access to the court system. Both elements should be analysed together in order to create cohesive and coordinated solutions. Hence, security forces and law enforcement organisations must prioritise safeguarding the rights of migrants and granting them access to inclusive judicial and legal systems. A comprehensive and migrant- aware approach to law enforcement, resulting from the restructuring of the security sector, may also aid in crime prevention and the fostering of social cohesion (IOM 2021). In contemporary times, international migration has become expensive and risky, as it deliberately restricts an individual’s legal access to the preferred destination. Moreover, the advantages of globalisation, such as enhanced and expedited communication, seamless ﬂow of ﬁnances, and unrestricted worldwide travel, have facilitated the growth, diversiﬁcation, and expansion of transnational and organised crime syndicates. The entire business of smuggling and trafﬁcking of migrants has emerged as a lucra- tive form of criminal activity as it deals with people’s illegal movement across borders in order to make a proﬁt. The smuggling of migrants is deﬁned as, The procurement, in order to obtain, directly or indirectly a ﬁnancial or other material beneﬁt, of the illegal entry of a person into a state Party of which the person is not a national or a permanent resident (Sharpe 2018).

11 INTERNATIONAL SECURITY AND IRREGULAR … 197 Unstable societies, lack of regular migration pathways and poor border management can create conducive environment for transnational crimes and the risks to which migrants are exposed (UNNM 2021). Trafﬁcking of human beings is deﬁned as, the recruitment, transportation, transfer, harbouring or receipt of persons, by means of the threat, or use of force or other forms of coercion, of abduction, of fraud, of deception, of the abuse of power or of a position of vulnerability or of the giving or receiving of payments or beneﬁts to achieve the consent of a person having control over another person, for the purpose of exploitation (UNODC 2000). Human trafﬁcking is both a cause for and consequence of viola- tions of human rights as well as global inequality, gender discrimination, marginalisation, and poverty. Migrants, especially irregular migrants are at a huge risk of becoming susceptible to human trafﬁcking, particularly in situations where labour regulations are relaxed and terrible working conditions are accepted in some areas related to domestic employment. This is exacerbated when migrants are separated from community and family support systems, lack access to lawful economic opportunities, legal recognition, and social safeguards, or engage in undocumented migration (IOM 2021). This global network of organised criminal activity poses a growing threat to national and international security, with negative consequence for public safety, health, functioning of democratic institu- tions, and economic stability throughout the globe. Criminal networks are not only expanding, but also broadening their operations, which has led to the convergence of threats that were formerly separate but are now having explosive and destabilising impacts. The thriving industry of migrant smuggling and human trafﬁcking may provide a signiﬁcant risk to law enforcement, particularly when they are connected to organised crime and interact with the transportation of illegal items, such as ﬁrearms and drugs. In this situation, the individuals who exploit migrants are the ones who are engaging in unlawful criminal activities, not the migrants themselves (IOM 2021). Armed conﬂicts frequently arise due to a multifaceted interplay of issues like inequality, weak governance, restricted economic prospects, and rivalry for resources. These factors are further intensiﬁed by the impacts of climate change. An often cited worldwide security problem is associated with the process of radicalisation and the manifestation of

198 S. AMBREEN violent extremism. Migrants may be escaping from violence instigated by violent extremist organisations in their home areas, but they may also be subjected to forceful, deceitful, or exploitative recruiting into these violent extremist organisations. Risk factors for recruitment include lack of education, unemployment, and restricted mobility. Additionally, inability to integrate into host communities owing to social isolation and marginalisation has also been cited as a contributing factor. Conﬂict prevention may address the many and diverse factors that contribute to violence and instability, which frequently lead to displacement. Preventive measures, including as demobilisation, disarmament, and reintegration (DDR), are typically most successful when implemented using a compre- hensive community-based strategy. Community policing is an additional method for preventing crime and resolving conﬂicts that should be taken into account (IOM 2021). Stabilisation endeavours might effectively avert, alleviate, and diminish the catalysts and adverse consequences of migration, including displace- ment, within vulnerable environments. The process entails efforts to provide favourable circumstances for the reinstatement of regular social, economic, and political activities. This is achieved by aiding in the restora- tion of fundamental rights and security, as well as by fostering societal unity, functional governance structures, and efﬁcient provision of liveli- hoods and services. Community-centred stabilisation involves the inclu- sion of vulnerable and marginalised groups, such as internally displaced persons (IDPs), refugees, former combatants, women, and youth. It also engages local communities, local authorities, and members of civil society in the process of making decisions. The objective of stabilisation is to provide a fundamental degree of stability that serves as a foundation for sustainable development and the establishment of security. Recon- struction, such as the restoration of power and water, is a signiﬁcant component of stabilisation endeavours, in which migrants may have a pivotal impact. Transnational networks can enable the ﬂow of ﬁnan- cial remittances, new skills, and capacities to boost rebuilding efforts. Additionally, displaced individuals and returnees can take the lead in reha- bilitating infrastructure in their communities. Furthermore, adopting a comprehensive, community-centred strategy for stabilisation can enhance social unity by uniting communities in the pursuit of common goals and aid in the prevention and reduction of conﬂicts, particularly those that arise from or contribute to violent extremism (IOM 2021).

11 INTERNATIONAL SECURITY AND IRREGULAR … 199 Irregular Migration and State Security The provisions of the international refugee law prevent states from deporting any individual with valid asylum claims by providing the right to seek and enjoy asylum from persecution. The same refugee law in all its treaties and legal documents has also put prime emphasis on protecting ‘state sovereignty’. The majority who support advancing refugee rights appear to believe that international refugee law (underpinned by the 1951 Refugee Convention) at least provides a break from states’ arbitrary treat- ment of asylum seekers and thus calls for a solid foundation for extending rights and protection to those seeking refuge across borders. However, Simon Behrman in his seminal work also makes a valid point by arguing that, International refugee law has evolved as a means of control over the refugee. The ﬁrst principles on which it has been built place the rights of the state above those of the refugee. Insofar as there is such a thing as a ‘right of asylum’, it is a right vested in the state rather than the refugee. For most people forcibly displaced around the world, refugee law is at best an irrelevance and at worst a barrier to protection (Berhman 2019). Historical evidence demonstrates that migration had a signiﬁcant role in driving worldwide socio-political changes during the twentieth century, alongside the two world wars, advancements in technology, and restruc- turing of the global economy. It has been a matter of security concern since the 1980s. Currently, international migration is a highly debated and controversial topic in the realm of security. The public discourse surrounding the nexus between migration and security mostly concen- trates around issues that involve safeguarding national security and the welfare of the citizens, and where irregular migration is widely debated as and is pre-conceived to be a signiﬁcant threat to the security of a nation as well as its citizens. Threat is an antithesis to security. It ‘induces anxiety and fear of varying intensity, ranging from fright or petriﬁcation to an impulse or action to counteract’ (Koser 2011). According to Khalid Koser, the notion that migration poses a threat to national security has intensiﬁed due to the rise in the number of ‘irregular’ migrants (Koser 2005). However, the manner in which these migrants can become a threat to national security has not been substantiated by well- grounded research. Other terms are often used in political and media

200 S. AMBREEN discourses, such as ‘illegal’, ‘undocumented’, ‘unauthorised’, or ‘clandes- tine’ migration to bolster the argument. Public perceptions of irregular migration have also become highly politicised. Such politicisation has caused the media and right-wing politicians to portray ‘uncontrolled migration’ as a threat to security. There are two common misconceptions regarding irregular migrants: ﬁrst, that they engage in unlawful activities and second, they are linked to the transmission of infectious diseases, notably HIV/AIDS. Both of these assumptions are broad generalisations. Within this context, it becomes important to shed some light on the manifestation of irreg- ular migrants as a major security threat during COVID-19. Nations which earlier had open border policies were forced to shut their doors to immigrants and ramp up vigilance in fear of spread of coronavirus. The worldwide lockdown and other travel restrictions had aggravated the global migration crisis. Unskilled and low-paid migrant workers lost their jobs as repercussions to the lockdown. Moreover, inability to maintain social distancing, lack of proper access to healthcare facilities, xenophobia, limited knowledge and awareness of the rules and regulations, all these took a toll on the overall well-being of migrants, particularly undocu- mented migrants. Even the principle of non-refoulement 1 was abrogated during the pandemic. Another beﬁtting example of side-stepping individual concerns for the sake of national security would be the case of Europe. The Euro- pean Union established the Frontex agency in 2005 to coordinate with member states and undertake risk studies in the ﬁeld of immigration control, amidst a hostile atmosphere of ‘defending Europe’. Over time, its responsibilities expanded to encompass the coordination of coast guard activities and addressing the routes for migration. The current EU system for managing and controlling migration, which has developed over the last four decades, is currently referred to as the ‘Area of Freedom, Security, and Justice’ (Koser 2005). The more recent policy of ‘externalisation’ also depicts a clear example of policies that aim to disregard human as well as national security concerns. The policy emerged as a key strategy in the European Union’s 1 Article 33(1) forbids nations from repatriating persons to a country where they would face a signiﬁcant danger of abuse of human rights. This principle ensures that individuals should not be sent back to a nation where they would be subjected to torture, cruel, inhuman, or humiliating treatment or punishment, as well as other irreversible harm.

11 INTERNATIONAL SECURITY AND IRREGULAR … 201 approach to managing irregular migration ﬂows. This strategy involves the delegation of migration management and border control responsibilities to regions and countries outside the EU. By outsourcing them, including the processing of refugees and asylum seekers, the EU aims to prevent irregular arrivals and maintain control over its borders. Externalisation has become a central component of the EU’s overall response to the chal- lenges posed by migration ﬂows. The implementation of certain measures has the potential to enhance the capacity for protection in both transit countries and countries of ﬁrst arrival. However, it has been observed that the implementation of the EU’s externalisation policy frequently results in the infringement upon the rights of the individuals. The phenomenon under consideration pertains to the obstruction of an individual’s funda- mental entitlement to freely exit a nation, be it their own or a foreign country. This obstruction often results in individuals becoming embroiled in circumstances characterised by abuse and exploitation. The practice in question undermines the fundamental right to seek asylum, as it compels individuals to pursue protection in nations where asylum systems are not adequately operational. It aggravates instances of human rights viola- tions that serve as a catalyst for migration rather than alleviating them. This exacerbation occurs through the provision of assistance to secu- rity or border forces that engage in abusive practices, as well as through the suppression of human rights diplomacy with third countries in the pursuit of collaborative efforts on migration-related matters (Human Rights Watch 2018). The EU member states have curtailed or eliminated legal migration pathways, particularly for low-income labourers, as part of their efforts to enhance security measures and safeguard their citizens. The decrease in authorised channels for migration, coupled with the on-going need for foreign labourers, has resulted in adverse outcomes. Initially, it resulted in an increase in irregular migration which involves the use of clan- destine migratory routes, hence promoting smuggling and occasionally leading to human trafﬁcking. This has caused fear over the inﬁltration of undesirable migrants and has led to a cycle of distrust between migrants and the European political community. Furthermore, it has established a clear division between ‘desirable migrants’ and ‘undesirable migrants’ that required the implementation of a system capable of distinguishing between them (Bilgic et al 2020). The current trend with regard to policy formulation and policy imple- mentation undoubtedly follows protecting state/national sovereignty and

202 S. AMBREEN the host population from apprehended immigration fallouts. The miscon- ception that migrants pose a danger to state sovereignty or security may be rectiﬁed by doing thorough and unbiased study and presenting the existing information. This should be accompanied by constructive conversation between governments, the media, and the general public. Few arguments in this regard need to be bolstered with more emphasis. Initially, numerical values hold signiﬁcance. The notion that irregular migration poses a challenge to state sovereignty and acts as a pressure on the national economy is based on the belief that governments are, or may be, overburdened by a large inﬂux of irregular migrants. The political importance of irregular migration often outweighs its numerical impor- tance. Furthermore, irregular migrants are frequently attributed with questionable motives without any supporting evidence (Koser 2005). Irregular Migration and Human Security The notion of human security redirects political and analytical focus from nation-states to the individuals, the primary subjects whose secu- rity should be given priority. Human security integrates the concepts of security, development, and human rights. This human-centric ideology presents an alternative strategy to address large-scale irregular migra- tion, necessitating a comprehensive intervention and collaboration among nations, global organisations, and non-governmental organisa- tions. Nevertheless, the lack of a well-deﬁned structure makes the concept of human security somewhat ambiguous, necessitating a deeper compre- hension of its current meaning in a vastly transformed global landscape compared to the late twentieth century, when the concept emerged with remarkable vigour in the ﬁeld of international relations. Furthermore, there is a need for additional advancements in operational tools and realistic action plans to ensure the effective execution of human security. One aspect that is commonly neglected in conversations about irreg- ular migration is the adverse effect it has on migrants themselves. Typi- cally, those who fall victim to trafﬁcking, particularly women and children, are frequently forced to exploitation in domestic work or the commercial sex industry. Some scholars have drawn comparisons between the contem- porary issue of human trafﬁcking and past occurrences of the slave trade due to the signiﬁcant level of human rights abuses involved. A criticism of the UN Protocols on Smuggling and Trafﬁcking is that they place greater emphasis on drawing attention to the human rights violations associated

11 INTERNATIONAL SECURITY AND IRREGULAR … 203 with trafﬁcking, while minimising the possible instances of abuse that may arise from migrant smuggling (Koser 2001). Studies speciﬁcally focused on the illicit transportation of asylum seekers have revealed that smug- gling can also subject migrants to many forms of economic, social, and political susceptibility. Migrants are not only at risk due to their irregular movement, but also because of their undocumented status. Irregular migrants frequently engage in unstable and hazardous employment, lacking access to health- care, education, and other social welfare beneﬁts. Additionally, they are vulnerable to exploitation within the housing market. In his work, Ramesh Thakur contends that a signiﬁcant number of individuals perceive security concerns as originating mostly from internal disputes, sickness, starvation, environmental degradation, street crime, and interpersonal violence (Thakur 2003). The acknowledgement of these variables forms the basis of the core principles of the human security approach, namely the concepts of ‘freedom from want’ and ‘freedom from fear’. When exam- ining large-scale migration from a human security standpoint, it involves analysing the social, political, and economic variables that serve as push factors, as well as assessing the circumstances of migrants in their new places of residence (Mawadza 2008). Mass irregular migration may be effectively managed and controlled by prioritising the enhancement of human security, since it is a signif- icant push factor that drives movement. Most political actors should recognise that individuals affected by civil wars and conﬂict, political/ ethnic/religious persecution, economic deprivation, famine, or migration under extremely poor health conditions are experiencing human inse- curity. The well-being and progress of individuals are often jeopardised when they migrate or reside irregularly inside a host or transit nation. The prevailing mental representation of mass irregular migration now vividly illustrates the connection between human insecurity and both the origins and consequences of such movement. If irregular migration is driven by human insecurity in various regions, it is crucial to consider the safety of migrants who encounter numerous inhumane conditions in detention centres, refugee camps, or when they fall victim to crim- inal networks that smuggle migrants and trafﬁc humans. An approach to human security which is grounded in various forms of social justice would view national security and human security as interdependent. Upon irreg- ular arrival in any nation, migrants are often associated with instances of illegal employment, exploitation in labour, engagement in prostitution,

204 S. AMBREEN and participation in networks involving human organ trafﬁcking. Human insecurity arises not just from the nations of origin or the illegal migration journey, but also from the circumstances that many immigrants encounter inside host cultures. Referring to the pandemic period once again, irregular migrants were already suffering from a myriad of difﬁculties before the onset of the pandemic. From being exploited at the hands of the ruthless smugglers to staying in overcrowded detention camps, the migrants easily became victims of various kinds of diseases and mental illness. Lack of food and nutrition, source of income, proper and safe place to reside, and an overall uncertainty about their future, all these factors caused high levels of anxiety among the migrants. An added misery in the form of a deadly and highly contagious virus simply led to a crisis within a crisis. Adam Coutts, a public health specialist at Cambridge University mentioned speciﬁcally about refugees being more vulnerable to COVID-19 or any other diseases due to factors such as ‘high geographical mobility, instability, living in overcrowded conditions, lack of sanitation and WASH (waters, sanita- tion and hygiene) facilities, and lack of access to decent healthcare or vaccination programmes in host communities’ (Reidy 2020). The fear of deportation too made undocumented migrants and asylum seekers reluc- tant to share vital information about their health, and even ask for basic medical assistance during the pandemic. Furthermore, strict lockdown prevented many migrants, including migrant workers from reuniting with their families. Labelling any problem as a security concern carries substantial conse- quences in terms of the laws, norms, policies, and procedures that are deemed appropriate in response. Within the realm of migration, the term ‘label’ has been employed to rationalise heightened levels of monitoring, conﬁnement, expulsion, and laws that impose stricter limitations. These responses can have adverse effects on the migrants, such as restricting asylum seekers from reaching secure locations, forcing migrants to rely on human smugglers and trafﬁckers, and fuelling an increasing anti- immigrant sentiment among the general public, the media, and in political discussions in several countries. Typical reactions to this include the notion that migration can serve as a means of importing terrorists and criminals, or as a way of disseminating contagious illnesses. These impres- sions are highly deceptive, yet they are widely held. There is scarce

11 INTERNATIONAL SECURITY AND IRREGULAR … 205 global data to suggest that migrant communities have a higher propor- tion of terrorists, prospective terrorists, or criminals when compared to indigenous populations (Koser 2011). When analysed through a different perspective, irregular migration can be seen as a threat to national sovereignty, as every state has the lawful authority to regulate the entry and stay of individuals within its bound- aries. It is noteworthy that the majority of irregular migrants globally have not entered a country without permission, but instead choose to stay or work without permit. However, the governments are judged quite strictly on the basis of their ability to handle migration. Public perception of a government’s handling of migrants is an important contributing factor in the responses of the governments in this regard. Irregular migration presents genuine challenges for nations, but migrants are also exposed to danger and vulnerability. The majority of nations have, however, been unsuccessful in efﬁciently managing or controlling irregular migration. Hence, there is a need for novel, efﬁcient, and consistent strategies to tackle the problem of irregular migration, which take into account the concerns of governments and the imperative to safeguard the rights of irregular migrants. Simultaneously, it is crucial to maintain a realistic perspective about expectations. Irregular migration is expected to persist in the foreseeable future, but it may be feasible to diminish its magnitude. One factor is the inﬂuential variables that shape the extent of interna- tional migration, such as the increasing differences in income and human security across various civilisations. However, the capacity to alter these forces is severely restricted (Crisp and Dessalegne 2002). Furthermore, despite the existence of some progress towards liberalisation in some regions, such as addressing the demographic deﬁcit, there will not be a signiﬁcant expansion of regular migration pathways to meet the overall need for movement. We must also recognise the restricted potential for innovative and revolutionary methods. Nations possess the authority to govern their borders, and in speciﬁc regions of the globe, decisions about irregular migration are inﬂuenced by the belief (regardless of its accu- racy) that countries face the possibility of being excessively burdened by a signiﬁcant inﬂux of illegal migrants, who are perceived as posing a threat to both the nation and its society. It is quite improbable that states will completely remove the control mechanisms they have implemented. However, nations are becoming more open to recognising that existing policy methods have achieved very limited success, and many are prepared to at least contemplate newer possibilities.

206 S. AMBREEN Concluding Observations The phrase ‘permacrisis’ chosen as the word of the year 2022 by Collins Dictionary, accurately describes the present global situation. Currently, the world is grappled in numerous crisis situations that appear to lack easy or durable solutions. Some notable examples are the Russia-Ukraine war, Israel-Palestine conﬂict, the Syrian conﬂict, the recent pandemic, and the on-going migrant issue. While recent policy measures have partially reduced the adverse effects of migration, the overall situation involving cross-border irregular migration continues to be a manifestation of prej- udice and a potential danger to national security. Even in case of refugees who are recognised by international law and protected under the 1951 Refugee Convention, Protracted Refuge Situations (PRS) depict a sign of political failures, carelessness, and poor resource allocation. Refugees in these situations are frequently locked in limbo: although it is not safe for them to return home, they have also not been granted perma- nent residency to stay in another nation. This situation contemplates an important fact—that the global refugee regime has basically been unsuc- cessful in providing concrete solutions to the refugee problem and to assist displaced persons regain a degree of normalcy and rebuild their lives. Iran and Pakistan, for example, are ‘one of the longest protracted situa- tions as they have hosted approximately 2.4 million Afghan refugees for the past 40 years’ (UNHCR 2020). PRS has been a daunting factor for nations as well as for organisa- tions dealing with refugees. It also highlights the challenges that the UNHCR has been facing in providing solutions to the on-going refugee crisis. The circumstances in the country of origin, the asylum coun- try’s governmental responses, and a variety of other actors’ inadequate engagement—all contribute to long-term displacement. Refugees and IDPs are unable to return home since the problems in their country of origin is never being addressed. Failure to communicate with the host nation only serves to promote the notion that refugees are an incon- venience and a security risk, which encourages encampments or seeking refuge in already crowded urban areas, preventing the development of regional solutions. Therefore, the problem of refugee and irregular migra- tion (including all their negative consequences) very aptly portray the situation of permacrisis. While irregular migration is a perceived threat to national and human security, it will not be wise to undermine its positive aspect. Through

11 INTERNATIONAL SECURITY AND IRREGULAR … 207 several policy measures, it is pushing states towards cooperation, coor- dination and exchange of information, especially at the regional level. These processes can contribute towards regional conﬁdence building and stability over time, which can in turn contribute towards stronger and a more balanced international system. Through the implementation of international cooperation, the destabilising implications of international migration must be addressed so that movements of persons across borders will no longer be a source of insecurity but rather a factor contributing to harmonious inter-state relations and to the development of the countries of origin, transit, and destination in all aspects. References AhsanUllah, AKM. 2013. Irregular migrants, human rights and securitization in Malaysia: An analysis from a policy perspective. In Tazreiter, C. et al (eds.), Globalization and Social Transformation in the Asia-Paciﬁc. Palgrave Macmillan. Berhman, S. 2019, March. Refugee law as a means of control. Journal of Refugee Studies, 32(1):42–62. Bilgic, A., Gasper, D., and Wilcock, C. 2020. A human security perspective on migration to Europe. University of Bristol Press. Commission on Human Security. 2003. Human Security Now. Communications Development Incorporated. Crisp, J., and Dessalegne, D. 2002. Refugee protection and migration manage- ment: the challenge for UNHCR. Estevens, J. 2019. Human (In)security and irregular migration: The Atlantic Basin. In Severiano, N., Teixeira, and Marcos, D. (eds.), Evolving Human Security Challenges in the Atlantic Space. Jean Monnet Network on Atlantic Studies. 1994. Human development report 1994: New dimensions of human security technical report. United Nations Development Program (UNDP). Integrating Migration into Security Interventions. 2021. International organi- zation for migration (IOM) and United Nations ofﬁce on drugs and crime (UNODC). Koser, K. 2005, September. Irregular migration, state security and human security. GCIM. Koser, K. 2011, March, 31. When is migration a security issue? Brookings. https://www.brookings.edu/articles/when-is-migration-a-security-issue/. Van Der Linj, J. 2019, June. Multilateral peace operations and the challenges of irregular migration and human trafﬁcking. SIPRI Background Paper.

208 S. AMBREEN Ozkul, D., Castles, S., Magdalena, A.C., and Kim, C. 2012. Irregular migra- tion: Causes, patterns, and strategies. Global Perspectives on Migration and Development, 117–151. Sharpe, M. 2018, March. Mixed up: International law and the meaning(s) of ‘Mixed Migration’. Refugee Survey Quarterly, 37(1): 116–138. https://doi. org/10.1093/rsq/hdx021 Thakur, R. 2003. Globalization, migration, and human security: challenges in Northeast Asia. United Nations University. Timothy, K. 2004. Human security discourse at the United Nations. Peace Review . 16 (1): 19–24. Towards an Effective and Principled EU Migration Policy: Recommendations for Reform. June 2018. Human rights watch. Ullah, A. A., Hasan, N. H., Mohamad, S. M., and Chattoraj, D., Migration and security: Implications for Minority Migrant Groups. India Quarterly, 76(1): 136–153. UNODC. 2020. UNHCR Report, 2020. https://www.unodc.org/documents/ treaties/Special/2000_Protocol_to_Prevent_2C_Suppress_and_Punish_Trafﬁ cking_in_Persons.pdf.

CHAPTER 12 International Management of Complex Humanitarian Emergencies: Challenges Ahead Omprakash Mishra and Amartya Ray Nothing better represents the multiplicity of crises facing the world on a permanent basis past about four decades than the phenomenon of ‘complex humanitarian emergency’ involving state failure and the imper- ative of reaching necessary assistance and relief to millions of civilians trapped in ever-increasing number of armed conﬂict in different parts of the world. Even while the state borders have become fragile, armed conﬂict of different hues involving incessant disorder in the domestic sphere with concomitant spill-over in the neighbouring countries have imperilled the life and security of an unprecedented number of human O. Mishra (B) Jadavpur University, Kolkata, India e-mail: professor.mishra@gmail.com A. Ray Thakur Panchanan Mahila Mahavidyalaya, Coochbehar Panchanan Barma University , Cooch Behar, India © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapor e Pte Ltd. 2024 O. Mishra and S. Sen (eds.), Global Political Economy, Geopolitics and International Security , https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-97-2231-0_12 209

210 O. MISHRA AND A. RAY beings, forced out of the country or forcibly displaced within their country. Rising expectations fuelled by the forces of globalisation and propelled by increased awareness of the interdependent effects of mass human displacement and consequences thereof have necessitated an inter- national response system in the state-centric Westphalian political order in the world. Even while the state-centric political order rules the world, there are unmistakable signs of the internationalisation of the prob- lems and crises facing the nation-states. Moreover, there is an increasing demand for an appropriate response mechanism to address the adverse effects of such problems. The various attempts to reﬂect the international concern towards the violent conﬂict raging in different parts of the world and the urgent ameliorative measures needed to contain the consequent humanitarian emergency have necessitated an increasingly elaborate and institutionalised system. Centrally, at the global level various arrangements spawned by the United Nations (UN) system, the International Red Cross Committee (ICRC) and some of the prominent International Non- Government Organisations (INGOs) are in the forefront of addressing the challenges involved. State Failure and Violent Conflicts Volatile international politics, and as a result transition in socio-political landscapes within the boundaries of nation-states, tend to create varying degrees of disquiet and tension which may give rise to violent conﬂicts. This was the situation around the globe from the mid-1980s when the end of the Cold War was imminent and change in not only governments but also in models of government was seen across continents. Accord- ingly, this phase came to be dominated with intra-state conﬂicts among groups with different claimed identities who were ﬁghting to take hold of the fragile state machinery. The number of such conﬂicts averaged at 20–25 per year till the early part of 1980s, but eventually it rose to 60– 65 per year, as per estimates by various studies conducted and this trend continued till the middle of 1990s (Klugman1999). Conﬂicts of this kind were, naturally, mostly armed and consequently these resulted in human catastrophes in terms of hunger, dislocation, homelessness, physical abuse and sometimes death. According to estimates of the International Red Cross Society, the number of vulnerable persons, due to such conﬂicts, rose dramatically during that period, adding almost ten million people to the count annually (Klugman 1999). The world was used to see wars

12 INTERNATIONAL MANAGEMENT OF COMPLEX … 211 between or among states and there were some, at least on paper, prin- ciples related to such wars. States tend to oblige to some norms and methods during their armed conﬂict with another. But this new kind of wars, mostly waged by a state against its own population or waged inside the national boundaries by factions of the population creating a humanitarian disaster had remained outside of legal, moral or theoret- ical frameworks except for the provisions of Common Article 3 in the Geneva Conventions, 1949. Thus, there emerged a need to look into these conﬂicts with a new lens, something different than what we used in conventional warfare, and set some principles to mitigate and regu- late them. Also, there was a need to deﬁne these new wars, without which it was not possible to analyse, interpret and explain them, averting humanitarian crises resulting from such wars. D e ﬁ n i n gt h e s e n e ww a r si st r i c k i e rt h a na si ts e e m st ob e , b e c a u s e conﬂicts are of so many varieties, encompassing a range of issues like ethnic, religious, political and social or a combination of them, or some- times simply avenging an old wrong is the motive. And in almost all the cases, the brunt of these conﬂicts is primarily and heavily borne by non-combatant civilians. Therefore, these conﬂicts are less of a war in conventional sense but more of a humanitarian crisis; and the extremely complex nature of these crises, due to intersection of a lot of issues and causes, these are termed as Complex Humanitarian Emergencies (CHE) . Simply put, the term ‘complex humanitarian emergency’ has been adopted by the United Nations to deﬁne conditions where armed conﬂict and the absence of an effective government and law and order have culminated in human disasters, symbolised by intense social tension and disruption. These emergencies generally crop up in places where the state institutions are either underdeveloped or have been worn out over time. Sometimes, relatively stronger states also fall prey to such emergen- cies if it gets overwhelmed by the extent, expanse and magnitude of the conﬂict. Restoration and maintenance of governance is the most impor- tant prerequisite to avert or at least mitigate such human tragedies and for that, sometimes, outside action in the form of intervention becomes necessary.

212 O. MISHRA AND A. RAY CHE: Meaning, Evolution and Characteristics Before starting the discussion, it needs to be remembered that human- itarian emergencies arising out of political conﬂicts are not a new phenomenon discovered in the late 1980s or early 1990s. Small-scale, intra-state violence perpetuated with the aim of capturing the state apparatus was pretty commonplace since the advent of the modern West- phalian state system. Also, political differences taking an armed dimension during the Cold War period was quite common where two superpowers or their regional partners took sides to champion their political and strategic agenda. These conﬂicts were often termed as Low-Intensity Conﬂicts (LICs) which took in its fold a range of violent instruments starting from civil wars to military coups. There had been other conceptual build-ups as well to deﬁne and describe conﬂicts limited to within the boundaries of a state and where civilians were the primary target, like new wars, etc. But none of those ideas or concepts could precisely represent what was happening from the 1980s in different parts of the world, in terms of its human dimension. These new conﬂicts were much different from the old ones; here warring factions were focusing on inﬂicting damages to the non-combatant general population and civilian infrastructure rather than the military assets of each other; and main purpose of this tactic was to spread fear and insecurity among the population as it was assumed that that would be less expensive but more effective in gaining control over territories. As a result of this territorial aspect of the conﬂict, naturally, these produced large numbers of Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) and refugees in and around the conﬂict zone. This shifting focus to civilians and emphasis on territory in place of each other’s forces and assets called for a new conceptual framework which had to be broader than the existing ones and at the same time it had to be human-centric and this was the crossroads where the concept of the Complex Humanitarian Emergency emerged. The term originated in the 1980s and it was ﬁrst used to describe the upheavals in Mozambique. During this time international humanitarian organisations realised the needs of aid and assistance which were trig- gered by the ongoing internal armed conﬂict (OECD 1999). The term was later adopted by various United Nations agencies and also people in academia since the early 1990s. Under Secretary General and Emergency Relief Coordinator (ERC) of the UN explained in his brieﬁng to the UN Security Council in 1999 that ‘contemporary armed conﬂicts are rarely

12 INTERNATIONAL MANAGEMENT OF COMPLEX … 213 conducted on a clearly deﬁned battleﬁeld, by conventional armies that confront one another. Instead warfare nowadays are regularly conducted within cities and villages, where civilians are the preferred targets, terror is spread intentionally, and the total physical eradication or displacement of certain classes of the population is the principal strategy’ (OCHA 1999). These conﬂicts are marked by rampant violation of human rights as well as humanitarian laws, resulting in mutilation, rape, forced starvation, attacks on medical facilities, etc. which were hitherto unforeseen in conventional wars. These violations, in fact, have become a part of the strategy of each side. This is why, these days, even local conﬂicts lead to tremendous human sufferings and call for international attention. A CHE generally involves a multiplicity of actors from different origins, with varied motives and speciﬁc instruments of choice for engagement, thus making the situation quite complicated. Mary Kaldor had identiﬁed ﬁve different types of actors: ﬁrstly, the regular armed forces; secondly, paramilitary groups; thirdly, self-defence units; fourthly, foreign merce- naries and lastly, the regular troops with the backing of international humanitarian regime (Kaldor 2007). We may add local mercenaries to this list as well. Moreover, though it bears the word ‘emergency’ in its nomenclature, the complex emergencies are more often than not actually long-lasting. It is therefore important to keep in mind that these situa- tions, as it is frequently depicted by the media or the policymakers, are not a series of unforeseen events leading towards a human catastrophe but a combination of causes that were brewing to become a threat to humanity over a long course of time. The situation is more complex in these cases as international treaties, covenants or the UN principles and directives do not apply to such developments and scope of international community’s response is also very restricted. Presently, complex emergencies essentially mark the most deﬁnitive way of state disruption. The most basic characteristic of such conﬂicts is the destroying of citizen’s ability to protect their life and sustain liveli- hood. High degree of violence leads to a situation where just saving life for another day becomes the primary goal of the affected popula- tion. As constitutional arrangements break down, the warring factions gather more strength and momentum. Generally, this phase of dimin- ishing government control is preceded by strong social strife manifested in the form of rampant corruption in the institutions of the state and criminalisation of politics. Usually an emergency-like situation builds up

214 O. MISHRA AND A. RAY with activities at three levels, namely—international, national and commu- nity levels. It is also necessary to take note that an emergency may or may not engulf the whole of a nation. For example, in African states like Sudan, the conﬂict zone was nation-wide and eventually South Sudan was carved out of it. But in the case of Myanmar, the conﬂict zone is mainly restricted to Rakhine province; or as in the case of Sri Lanka, it was the north-eastern Jaffna peninsula. In some cases, emergencies were brought under control with political or military intervention from inside or out, quite quickly, like that in Eastern Europe or in the Balkans in the 1990s, whereas some conﬂicts continue with tremendous human suffering and violation of basic human rights, like in Syria, Afghanistan and Myanmar. To be precise, the following characteristics may be attributed to a CHE: 1. It is essentially intra-state or domestic affair, not inter-state, 2. Though it is an intra-state affair, it has spiralling effect in the neighbourhood, 3. It is very difﬁcult to separate combatants and civilians, 4. Civilians and civil structures are primary target of violence, 5. Illegal, shadow economy grows with this kind of emergencies and 6. It generally has several actors of different hues with often overlap- ping interests. Humanitarianism and Government Though there is no strictly agreed-upon deﬁnition of humanitarianism, it broadly refers to dedication and belief in the fundamental value of human life—this central ethical consideration is accepted worldwide. This term also makes a more speciﬁc reference to the crisis response that has evolved from the founding of the International Red Cross Society and the ﬁrst Geneva Convention over 150 years ago. As a systemic response to crisis, humanitarianism involves the needs of affected people trapped in a conﬂict (PHAP 2021). When a conﬂict occurs, need of security and humanitarian aid heightens. Victims of the conﬂict require both; but the government has to make a choice; and more frequently security takes priority over aid. A government which is under threat to its authority, primary objective is to bring the situation under control and restore law and order in the

12 INTERNATIONAL MANAGEMENT OF COMPLEX … 215 conﬂict zone. But the other objective of rebuilding the destroyed phys- ical and institutional structures and addressing the urgent need of aid in the form of food, medicine, etc. cannot be overlooked either. Thus, the affected government’s ability is stretched to limits and it tends to prioritise while at the same time looking for international assistance. Internationalisation of Humanitarian Crises Humanitarian issues dominating the discourse of international politics is nothing new. In the ﬁrst few decades of the twentieth century, these issues played an important role in shaping and reshaping of opinion of the masses on wars, especially the two world wars. In the following decades humanitarian concerns largely dominated the discussions on the Vietnam War, the Spanish civil war or the liberation movement of Bangladesh and so on. However, the way and in what frequency these concerns related to humanitarianism and human rights laws came to limelight during various crises of the 1980s and 1990s, were unprecedented (ICRC 1999). The UN General Assembly’s Resolution 46/182 established the Guiding Principles for the world community’s response to humanitarian crises and this was also instrumental in the establishment of the Ofﬁce of the Emergency Relief Coordinator (ERC) and the Inter-Agency Standing Committee (ISAC). The ISAC takes within its fold various important humanitarian players both within and outside the ambit of the UN and it principally focuses on data sharing, analysis and collective decision-making with regard to an emerging humanitarian crisis. The primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security lies with UN Security Council under Article 24 of the UN Charter and it has the authority to determine whether a situation poses threat to international peace and security under Article 39, Chapter 7. The Council may opt for coercive action in the form of collective use of force (Article 42) or the imposition of sanctions (Article 41). Moreover, though it has not been formally mentioned in the Charter, the Council is authorised to deploy ‘robust’ Peacekeeping Operations, the mandate of which under Chapter 7 includes use of force. In last half of the previous century, the Security Council following its given mandate has deployed peacekeeping operations or sometimes carried out military intervention to mitigate humanitarian crises in different parts of the globe. However, it has been frequently criticised for being selective, and sometimes prejudiced, in its approach. It has

216 O. MISHRA AND A. RAY remained highly sensitive to conﬂicts involving European powers or situ- ations developing on European soil, whereas its approach to situations in Africa, Latin America or Asia has often been marked by either haste or overdoing or simply gross negligence. For instance, the world community has remained kind of spectator in Russia’s aggression in Ukraine twice in recent times; on the contrary it is charged with unnecessary and avoidable damages in Libya. In the case of Afghanistan, the Western mission left the scene without erecting an effective ﬁrewall against the very menace they fought and dislodge from power, leaving millions of Afghans to fend for themselves. It is argued that decisions regarding intervention or to be remaining on the side-lines, or sometimes leaving a situation half-baked, in a conﬂict is mainly determined by the powerful few and their perceived interests. Consequently, the term ‘world community’ is reduced to a set of few powerful states, especially the veto-yielding permanent ﬁve. In any case, internationalisation of crisis management has become the norm of the day nonetheless. It is argued that this new develop- ment, i.e. internationalisation of humanitarian emergencies has basically stemmed from the current discourse of international interdependence. It is presumed that walking alone in international politics was never possible but it has become even more impossible in this age of interconnected- ness due to technological advancement and globalisation as such in terms of ﬁnancial, social and cultural inﬂuence. Maddison points out, ‘Inter- national trade is taken to be an indicator of interdependence and its high and, with some interruptions, rapidly growing values are accepted as evidence of the increasing interdependence of nations. For instance, between 1820 and 1992, world population increased ﬁvefold, income per head eightfold, world income 40-fold, and world trade 540-fold’ (Maddison 2003). CHE and Displacement Fatalities as a consequence of a complex humanitarian crisis are mostly indirect in the sense that more people go through long-term suffering not as a direct result of the ensuing war but as displaced people living without almost no human facilities and protection, as IDPs (Internally Displaced Persons) or as refugees. Since the 1990s, the vulnerability and helpless- ness of the people who are displaced within the state boundaries have engaged both the academia and the policy community. Persistent effort from some international humanitarian agencies, human rights advocacy

12 INTERNATIONAL MANAGEMENT OF COMPLEX … 217 groups or INGOs has been able to make the voices of these people heard and also helped in developing a framework much needed for protection and dignity of human lives entangled in such internal conﬂicts. If people escaping a conﬂict are denied access to neighbouring country, they would deﬁnitely try to settle down in other parts of their own country which they consider safer. Thus, in most of the modern conﬂicts, we can see ﬂow of both IDPs and refugees—having different needs and concerns. But the trend indicates that the IDPs are outnumbering refugees in conﬂict zones in recent intra-state or civil wars. As per the records of the UNHCR, the number of IDPs stood at 62.5 million, whereas the number of refugees was 34.6 million during the middle of the current year (UNHCR 2023). These disturbing numbers are mainly due to excessive mushrooming of ANSAs (Armed Non-State Actors) in conﬂict zones across the globe; as they do not care to adhere to the norms and principles laid down in international law with regard to the conduct of war and violate human rights rampantly too. Internal conﬂicts and thereby internal displacements are not easily resolved. Protracted displacement is a reality for most of the IDPs. Afghanistan, Syria, DR Congo, Yemen, Ethiopia, etc. are some striking examples of such long-term displacement, having been there for decades. A systematic approach for understanding the critical situation of the IDPs and their needs began with the appointment of Francis M. Deng as the Special Representative of the UN Secretary General on IDPs. The Special Representative and his team were assigned the task of drafting a document which could be used as the ‘Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement’ aiming at the international response and national action for the IDPs. It was believed that international human rights laws (IHRL), international humanitarian laws (IHL) and international refugee laws were insufﬁcient in providing a safety net to the IDPs; and the Guiding Principles was basically a comprehensive document which consisted of both but went further ahead in its scope. This was necessary and eventu- ally became instrumental in protection of rights of the IDPs. For refugees, there has been a legal and ethical framework in place since the World War II with speciﬁc reference to their rights and safety; but this idea of IDP is a product of the new age intra-state wars or internal violent conﬂicts and that is why it requires a new set of guidelines. In this way, the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement represents a milestone in the evolu- tion and norm-setting for the protection of internally displaced persons

218 O. MISHRA AND A. RAY around the world. The 30 principles included cover almost each and every aspect of assistance and protection for the displaced people. International Response to Humanitarian Emergencies Till a few decades ago, international involvement in internal crisis of a state used to be limited to humanitarian aid and assistance in recon- struction. But the number of crises and consequent devastation of such intra-state conﬂicts went beyond all previous parameters from the early 1980s. Conceptions of human rights and humanitarian assistance were also undergoing change during the same time and internationally it was generally accepted that certain rights of humans are inviolable under whatsoever circumstances. This caught the international community in a moral dilemma as to whether intervene in such a crisis or not. On strict legal terms, it was difﬁcult to establish logic for encroaching upon a state’s sovereign sphere; at the same time, it was impossible to sit quietly in the face of immense human suffering and brutality. The UN Secu- rity Council Resolution 688 of 5th April, 1991 was a watershed moment in this debate. The US, the UK and France led a hitherto unforeseen relief operation to protect the minority Kurds facing state violence from Saddam Hussein’s Iraq. This is probably the decisive moment when the ongoing debate over meaning and scope of sovereignty was put to rest. In the post-Cold War world, sovereignty was more frequently projected as a responsibility of state than its absolute rights over its citizens. Francis M. Deng and his committee’s submission of sovereignty as responsibility had found traction both in international legal and moral parlance. The traditional notion of sovereignty rests heavily on the criterion of popular support, as they say; therefore, if that support from its own people is withdrawn, then popular sovereignty loses its ground and the interna- tional community is free to act to protect the citizens from the state they belong to. It is a fact that standards of accepted behaviour of states have under- gone change over time. Genocide, ethnic cleansing, etc. provoke a very different and sharp reaction around the world than it was used to generate 3–4 decades ago. Due to advancement in communication technology and its affordability, people are more aware of what is happening around them and their reactions to events have changed accordingly. In this changed backdrop, government’s reaction and management of a crisis have seen

12 INTERNATIONAL MANAGEMENT OF COMPLEX … 219 major changes too. Governments today are expected to be both respon- sible and responsive. Globalisation and its forces have increased outside scrutiny manifold over how a government maintains its relation with its citizens. International Commission on Intervention and State Sovereignty (ICISS), a Canada-backed project, proposed some deﬁnitive solutions to the debate on intervention in its report published in 2001. The very title of the report, ‘Responsibility to Protect’ (R2P), is signiﬁcant and instructive of what it may contain. This report became the basis of the agreement reached by world leaders in the World Summit Outcome held in 2005 to address the issues of atrocity crimes of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and war against humanity. The leaders agreed that these particular four types of grave crimes which result in complex humani- tarian emergencies may be and should be dealt with under the doctrine of Responsibility to Protect (R2P). Both the UN Security Council and General Assembly endorsed the R2P doctrine and it has been at the centre of quite a few actions since then. The report highlights that the plethora of armed conﬂicts made easy by cheap and lethal weapons of destruc- tion in a ‘convulsive process of state fragmentation and state formation’ (ICISS 2001) in many parts of the world, necessitates a rethinking on approaches to security and the role of states. However, it needs to be kept in mind that intervention does not necessarily mean military inter- vention; and intervention aimed at protecting the victims might go wrong and there are examples of that. Dilemmas for International Community There are three dilemmas we encounter with regard to international management of Complex Humanitarian Emergencies (CHE) around the world. These are: First, it is debatable whether to provide humanitarian assistance in a particular CHE or not. At the outset this may sound extremely odd. When men are going through catastrophic situation due to intra-state warfare or extensive conﬂict and violence caused by failure of the state machinery, one would be expected to lend a helping hand. Complex emergencies usually bring along starvation, lack of medical care, rooﬂess life, etc. In general, undigniﬁed life needs immediate attention. Interna- tional community tries to respond to such situations with emergency relief through humanitarian agencies. But the problem lies with delivery of such

220 O. MISHRA AND A. RAY relief. Quite often this relief reaches the perpetrators of violence instead of the victims who actually need it. In a situation of complex emergency, law and order breaks down and local control is taken over by one or the other of the belligerent sides in different parts of the state. It becomes easy for them to forcefully divert the route of those reliefs to their choice of desti- nation. In fact, not allowing reliefs to the victims is also a part of the war plan. Thus, while trying to help the victims, to be precise non-combatant civilians, the world community may add fuel to the ﬁre. It may unwittingly prolong the warfare by providing non-military assistance to the party they intend to bring down. Moreover, there are also cases of misappropriation of resources by local stakeholders who are an integral part of the relief delivery mechanism. Foreign donors or the agencies are not familiar with the terrain or the demography of the area they plan to serve. As a result, they must take help from the local community leaders or the local NGOs which sometimes turn out to be corrupt or established during the conﬂict with the sole aim of diverting the resources for private gain. The multi- donor evaluation of the Rwandan crisis, for example, could not trace a third of the 170 registered NGOs, and around $120 million of funding could not be accounted for (World Disasters Report 1997). Second, there is dilemma relating to taking military support in relief distribution. Complex political emergencies create such a condition of hostility and lawlessness that sometimes it becomes impossible for the humanitarian organisations to reach the turf of hostility on their own. These agencies are essentially neutral, unarmed and profess non- discriminatory distribution of relief. But the belligerents more often than not perceive them as an agent of the opposition. Thus, they do not allow the aid workers to go to hinterlands under their control or block the roads to the conﬂict zones. In Somalia, Al-Shabab used to exact money from the aid agencies to work inside their land, and eventually went up to asking for unequal allotment of aid to them, which paved the way for exit of the ICRC which has always remained committed to neutrality in aid distribution (Jackson n.d.). In some cases, the national army, if not a party to the ensuing conﬂict makes the passage for the aid workers. On other times, when the national government itself is a party to the conﬂict, the situation becomes more complicated. Still the governments are, at least to some extent, bound by some rules and principles, and aid agencies can negotiate a way to work with them. The condition is totally unfavourable when the government is non-existent and the warring factions do not adhere to the rules and conventions of warfare. Attack on aid workers is

12 INTERNATIONAL MANAGEMENT OF COMPLEX … 221 on the rise and that is a testament to this claim. In 2021, 461 aid workers were victims of major attacks, and 141 were killed, 203 got wounded and 117 were kidnapped across the globe (AWSD 2022). Following the September 11 attacks, political rhetoric about human- itarian organisations focused on their role in the war on terror. Former U.S. Secretary of State Colin Powell, in 2001, mentioned of NGOs as a ‘force multiplier for the United States and a part of the U.S. combat team’ (Powell 2001). Humanitarian organisations condemned these comments, as they disregarded the principles of neutrality, impartiality and indepen- dence (Burnett 2004). According to the Red Cross Movement, stringent counter-terrorism laws coupled with greater dependence on military are the latest obstacle in provision of aid. This hobnobbing with military sometimes portrays an idea of integrated front in the ﬁght against terror which includes NGOs. This has led to immense loss for the relief commu- nity as it seriously hampers their credibility and capability to negotiate adverse situations. For example, armed groups in Pakistan had refused to allow the ICRC and Pakistani Red Crescent Societies to provide aid, believing that they were actually running a search and security operations on behalf of the Western powers. It is largely believed that Osama Bin- Laden was found by the health staff administering polio vaccines to the children in a door-to-door campaign organised by the government, and this perception among people led to a halt in that campaign and it left grassroots-level health workers in Pakistan exposed to life risk. The third and most important dilemma is regarding intervention, espe- cially a military one. Legally, the answer to this question of military or otherwise intervention is a straight no. Sovereignty of states within its boundary is the foundational principle upon which the modern state system is standing. Under the UN framework principles, no power, for whatsoever reason, is entitled to intervene in another state. But this textual interpretation is often challenged by contextual reading. Article 2(7) dictates that the United Nations has no authority to intervene in matters which are apparently well within the domestic jurisdiction of a state. At the same time, it was also readily seen that plea of domestic jurisdiction may serve as an excuse for UN scrutiny or action neces- sary to serve the cause of international peace and security. Therefore, the framers of the Charter kept a backdoor for UN action in the shape of Chapter 7 as constituting an exception to the otherwise general rule of non-interference. Since the 1990s, the interventions by the United Nations in an internal or international situation of armed conﬂict or to

222 O. MISHRA AND A. RAY quell civic disturbances at a large scale or to mitigate the sufferings of the civilians caught in humanitarian emergency situations have been under- taken under Chapter 7. Moreover, the UN when consensus could be reached has taken an expansive view of the requirement under Chapter 7 for enforcement ‘action with respect to threats to peace, breaches of peace and acts of aggression’. Thus, the UN has intervened and/or even authorised intervention in a large number of situations involving violent armed conﬂict endangering civilians, forcible displacement of people across the country (IDP) or beyond the border (refugees) and in other manifestations of complex emergencies within a country. As per the Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions, states are also required to provide consent to pass relief operations through the territory under their control. So technically, there is no need for inter- vention, humanitarian in name and military in nature, to any country as the disagreements can be resolved within the UN framework. But reality is far from this ideal state of affairs. Let us take the case of East Pakistan where India had to intervene and help the emergence of an indepen- dent Bangladesh in the face of unprecedented human rights violation and abuse of human dignity which had a spill-over effect on India in terms of millions of refugees. Pakistani authorities had blockaded relief works in East Pakistan in the ﬁnal phase of the assault and censored media, thus practically cutting the land and its people from the rest of the world. It was clearly a political or humanitarian emergency and complex in nature. It became a question of justice over order or order over justice for India and it chose the ﬁrst line. New Delhi was heavily criticised by the US and its Western allies for its action but it went ahead anyway. When Vietnam invaded Cambodia in 1978 to uproot the inhuman Pol Pot regime, it was condemned too by the UNSC, it stopped just short of taking coercive action against them. In fact, France launched a scathing criticism citing the inviolability of sovereign rights of a state, ignoring the butchery that was going on at that time in Cambodia. Ironically France was an active participant in NATO action in Kosovo in 1999, which even bypassed the UN to launch a quick, deﬁnitive strike. So, there is nothing in black and white as to whether a state or a group of states, within or outside the UN auspices, can intervene into another in case of a complex humani- tarian emergency, citing human rights violation and/or state failure. The West did launch such offensives time and again, against Iraq, Libya and Afghanistan, etc. and sometimes failed to act where it was much needed, like that in Rwanda or Syria.

12 INTERNATIONAL MANAGEMENT OF COMPLEX … 223 Conclusion The base and the basis for the emergence, ﬂourishing as well as the suste- nance of the nation-state system for the past few centuries has been the imperative of affording security at the individual and community level to the people and the ability of the states to thwart external aggres- sion and intervention. The expansion of connectivity and interdependence in the recent decades in the world together with the felt necessity of centring human beings and their security and welfare as the goal of the national development and international cooperation has necessitated a strong urge for avoiding conﬂict and war and mitigate and redress the consequences thereof. We therefore are witness to repeated occurrences of violent conﬂict and at the same time unceasing efforts to contain these at the international level. However, the inventiveness and innovation at the global level through the legal instrumentalities and conﬂict resolution mechanisms as well as political-military interventions have weakened but hardly deterred the complex violent conﬂict and war raging in various parts of the world. The resultant consequences have destabilised main- tenance of political order within the borders of the nation-states and exacerbated international crises including in the form of the return of international war in the last couple of years. Consequently, an effective international management of violent armed conﬂict and war continue to delude attainment of peace and security in the world. Acceptance of the centrality of human life and rights in the political narrative of the world often stands defeated in the face of the weaknesses of the international human rights and humanitarian regime and the deﬁciencies in consensus making processes at the political level in the UN system. The interna- tional management of CHEs therefore is more often than not is a casualty that must be addressed by fresh approaches and international consensus building. References Aid Workers Security Report 2022. 2022. Aid worker security database. https:// www.humanitarianoutcomes.org/sites/default/ﬁles/publications/awsd_figu res_2022.pdf. Burnett, J. S. 2004, August 4. Opinion | In the Line of Fire. The New Y ork Times,https://www.nytimes.com/2004/08/04/opinion/in-the-line-of- ﬁre.html.

224 O. MISHRA AND A. RAY Humanitarianism. 2021. International association of professionals in humani- tarian assistance and protection. https://phap.org/PHAP/PHAP/Themes/ Humanitarianism.aspx#:~:text=As%20a%20systemic%20response%20to,nat ural%20disaster%2C%20epidemic%20and%20famine. International Commission on Intervention and State Sovereignty. 2001. The Responsibility to protect. international development research centre. https:// www.globalr2p.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/10/2001-ICISS-Report.pdf. International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies. 1997.World disasters report 1997. Oxford University Press. Jackson, A. n.d. A deadly Dilemma: How Al-Shabaab came to dictate the terms of humanitarian aid in Somalia. ODI. https://odi.org/en/insights/a-deadly- dilemma-how-al-shabaab-came-to-dictate-the-terms-of-humanitarian-aid-in- somalia/. Kaldor, M. 2007. New and old wars: Organized violence in a global era. 2nd ed. Stanford University Press. Klugman, J. 1999. Social and economic policies to prevent complex humanitarian emergencies lessons from experience. WIDER, Policy Brief 1999/002. UNU- WIDER. Maddison, A. 2003. The world economy development centre studies. Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. Ofﬁce for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. 1999. OCHA Orienta- tion handbook on complex emergencies. https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb. int/ﬁles/resources/OCHA%C2%A0ORIENTATION%20HANDBOOK.pdf. Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development. 1999. Guidance for evaluating humanitarian assistance in complex emergencies. https://www. oecd.org/development/evaluation/2667294.pdf. Powell, C. L. 2001, October 26. September 11, 2001 : Attack on America. National foreign policy conference for leaders of nongovernmental organizations. https://avalon.law.yale.edu/sept11/powell_brief31.asp. Refugee Data Finder. 2023, October, 24. UNHCR—The UN Refugee Agency. https://www.unhcr.org/refugee-statistics/. The Role of Humanitarian Issues in International Politics in the 1990s— ICRC. n.d. ICRC. https://www.icrc.org/en/doc/resources/documents/art icle/other/57jpsu.htm.

PART III Regional Variations and Implications of Permacrisis

CHAPTER 13 China’s Transition from ‘Peaceful Rise’ to ‘Chinese Dream’: A Critical Assessment of China’s Changing Narrative under Xi Jinping Priyadarshini Ghosh Widespread apprehension both within the academic circles and among the political elites surrounding China’s rise has characterised the global political landscape in recent years. With its entry into the World Trade Organization in 2001, Chinese economy has undergone rapid trans- formation so much so that China became the global leader in leading technologies from just being once the low-cost ‘factory to the world’. Thus, emboldened by its economic might, China leveraged its inter- national diplomacy to become a leading trading partner of emerging economies across the world. As a rising power, China became more vocal in its power ambitions—namely to emerge as the next global hegemon. P . Ghosh (B) Maynaguri College, University of North Bengal, West Bengal, India e-mail: ghoshpriyadarshini1@gmail.com © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapor e Pte Ltd. 2024 O. Mishra and S. Sen (eds.), Global Political Economy, Geopolitics and International Security , https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-97-2231-0_13 227

228 P . GHOSH China’s strategic posturing especially in the aftermath of the ‘unraveling of American power’ has given credence to the idea that the ‘pivot’ of power in international politics has gradually shifted from the Atlantic to the Paciﬁc (Cooley and Daniel, 2020). Beijing’s military modernisation programme together with its assertive international posturing, particu- larly with regard to China’s territorial disputes in the South China Sea, have been read as signals for China’s great power ambitions which have sent political ripples across the international waters. Such moves exacer- bated global apprehensions and heightened the threat perception of other major powers in its immediate neighbourhood and also the United States. Once worried that negative branding of China’s image could impede its continued economic growth as well as its image as a whole, Beijing sought to attach itself to the slogan of “peaceful development” (China’s Peaceful Development, 2011) in an attempt to reassure not only the developing countries but also its own neighbours that its newfound strength was benign. Hu Jintao after assuming Presidency in 2003 advocated for a ‘harmonious world’ and China’s ‘peaceful rise’ (heping jueqi), both important ideological pillars of China’s soft power policy. However, the term ‘peaceful rise’ has been consigned to the dustbin of history once Xi Jinping became the supreme leader. Contemporary Chinese political literature and Xi Jinping’s vision statements clearly capture the dramatic transformation that Chinese foreign policy has undergone, wherein China no longer hesitates to shed off its ambiguity and project its worldview and power overtly. The Xi Jinping era has been the fulcrum of this transfor- mation. The objective of this chapter is to understand and analyse the context behind this transformation. Accordingly, this chapter endeavours to examine how China’s global ‘outreach’ became ‘overreach’ under Xi Jinping’s stewardship. This writing has been structured into four sections. The ﬁrst part is devoted to the understanding of the concept of peaceful rise, followed by the transition to the Xi Jinping era and his idea of national rejuvenation or the ‘Chinese dream’. In this context, taking a cue from Fareed Zakaria’s logic of neoclassical realism, the third part shall try to capture how the internal political transition in China had its repercus- sions on China’s foreign policy. In the ﬁnal part, we shall focus on three different issue areas of Chinese foreign policy in the Xi Jinping era which might have global strategic implications for the decades ahead.

13 CHINA’S TRANSITION FROM ‘PEACEFUL RISE’ TO ‘CHINESE … 229 China’s ‘Peaceful Rise’ under Hu Jintao It was in President Hu Jintao’s tenure that China’s political leadership came up with the idea of China’s “peaceful rise”. The ‘peaceful rise’ theory was ﬁrst introduced by Zheng Bijian in November 2003 at the China-sponsored Boao Forum for Asia. Zheng Bijian was a former vice president of the Communist Party of China (CPC) Central Party School as well as a former chairman of the China Reform Forum, a representa- tive semi-governmental organisation for China’s diplomacy. Zheng also served as President Hu Jintao’s senior foreign policy advisor. In 2013, in his speech titled ‘China’s Road of Peaceful Development and the Building of Communities of Interests’, at the 5th World Forum on China Studies, in Shanghai, Zheng Bijian clariﬁed what he meant by ‘peaceful rise’. He said, “As an observer and scholar, since I proposed the concept of “China’s peaceful rise”, I have always stressed that the word ‘peaceful’ is directed against ‘China threat’ argument and the word ‘rise’ is directed against ‘China collapse’ views, both spread by some international opin- ions” (Bijian 2013). Zheng conﬁgured that China’s peaceful rise discourse could act as an effective counter-narrative to the China-threat theory and pacify the sound of alarm associated with China’s rise in some Western corners of the world. At the Center for Strategic and International Studies of the United States on December 9, 2002, Zheng said, China will have a totally different path of development from the path of rise of all major powers in the world since modern history. This will be a brand new path of development. I want to emphasize one point here. Our path is different from both the paths of Germany in World War I and Germany and Japan in World War II, when they tried to overhaul the world political landscape by way of aggressive wars. Our path is also different from that of the former U.S.S.R. during the reign of Brezhnev, which relied on a 5 military bloc and arms race in order to compete with the United States for world supremacy. Our brand new path relies upon the following factors, namely: relying on our own development; relying on the opening up of markets; relying on institutional innovation; relying on getting connected with economic globalization instead of being isolated from it; and relying on reciprocity and mutual beneﬁt with other countries for the purpose of win-win relations (Bijian 2005). After Zheng’s introduction of the ‘peaceful rise’ theory at the Boao Forum in 2003, the theory gained greater visibility, having been

230 P . GHOSH mentioned at a Harvard lecture by Premier Wen Jiabao in December 2003 and also referred to by Hu Jintao at an event celebrating the 110th birth anniversary of Mao Zedong. However, since April 2004, both Pres- ident Hu Jintao and Premier Wen Jiabao replaced the use of ‘peaceful rise’ with the term ‘peaceful development’. A case in point was a lecture delivered at the Boao Forum in April 2004, where Hu Jintao explained China’s foreign policy with the concept of peaceful development rather than peaceful rise. This change in terminology was triggered by a deci- sion reached by the Chinese government not to use ‘peaceful rise’ as an ofﬁcial term. The main trigger for the peaceful rise theory came from the discourses on ‘China as a threat’. This viewpoint put forward by some Western academics, who regarded China’s emergence as a ‘threat’, became an intense topic of discussion and debate (Kurlantzick 2007: 65). Such a view garnered a negative publicity for an emerging power like China and according to Chinese scholars and political leaders appeared to have engendered a negative branding for China’s image abroad. The peaceful rise theory sought to counter this negative image of China (Pathak 2015). However, simply understanding the peaceful rise theory as a response to the China-threat theory would be too naive. According to Li Mingjiang ( 2008), the peaceful rise theory was proposed “to declare China’s expan- sion of national power and its presumed forthcoming rise to global power status, and to gain acceptance of this declaration from neigh- bouring Asian countries” (Mingjiang 2008). What is interesting to note in this respect is that China’s proposal of the term ‘rise’ itself has great signiﬁcance attached to it vis-à-vis its foreign policy. The proposal of the peaceful rise implicates the transformation of China’s foreign policy in three ways: ﬁrst, there is a “switch from America-centric diplomacy to neighbour centric diplomacy”; second, “from diplomatic objectives focused on gaining admission into the international society to the goal of undertaking global leadership role”; and third is “the transformation from a diplomatic strategy focused on China’s economic development to one centered on increasing its comprehensive national power” (Mingjiang 2008). Put it simply, peaceful rise theory symbolically declared the trans- formation in China’s global strategy from being inward looking to the one focused on carving out for itself a global role. This line of thinking as calibrated by Zheng during the Hu Jintao era reciprocated in many ways, the spirit of the earlier decades. China’s leaders adopted a restrained approach to foreign policy for almost three

13 CHINA’S TRANSITION FROM ‘PEACEFUL RISE’ TO ‘CHINESE … 231 decades after Mao’s death in 1976. They were of the view that any threat to the power of the CPC and its leaders came from within and not from abroad. This notion was cemented by the 1989 Tiananmen crisis. Accord- ingly, to pave the way for the country’s “inexorable economic ascendance, and to prevent a backlash, they reassured the outside world of China’s peaceful intentions” (Shirk 2022: 4). Then, something changed, as Susan Shirk ( 2022) observed in her very recent and extremely illuminating, disturbing and utterly persuasive book, Overreach: How China Derailed its Peaceful Rise. She observed that from a ‘fragile superpower’ China marched forward to become a “global heavyweight, threatening Taiwan as well as its neighbours in the South China Sea, tightening its grip on Hong Kong and openly challenging the United States for preeminence not just economically and technologically but militarily” (Shirk 2022: 12). China began to ‘overreach’ and thus began its phase of transition to the Xi Jinping era. What is the ‘Chinese Dream’? Xi Jinping completed a decade in ofﬁce and began an unprecedented third term at the Communist Party’s 20th Party Congress held in October 2022. Ever since, Xi’s taking over, his views on China’s place in the world have begun to make its way into the Chinese political literature. In China ‘Qiang guo’ or strong country is the much popular axiom that has found its place now. Phraseology of the earlier eras like that of China’s ‘peaceful rise’ (Hu Jintao era) and ‘biding time, hiding brightness’ (Deng’s era) lay buried in the sands of time. The thrust of Xi’s argument is that China’s time has come. During his ‘Road to Rejuvenation’ speech on November 29, 2012, Xi spelt out, brieﬂy, his ideas of the ‘Chinese Dream’. He said: In the future, the Chinese nation will ‘forge ahead like a gigantic ship breaking through strong winds and heavy waves’…Everyone has an ideal, ambition and dream. We are now all talking about the Chinese Dream. In my opinion, achieving the rejuvenation of the Chinese nation has been the greatest dream of the Chinese people since the advent of modern times… Empty talk harms the country, while hard work makes it ﬂourish. Our generation of Communists should draw on past progress and chart a new course for the future. We should strengthen Party building, rally all the sons and daughters of the Chinese nation around us in a common effort to build our country and develop our nation, and continue to boldly advance towards the goal of the rejuvenation of the Chinese nation” (Jinping 2012).

232 P . GHOSH At the Communist Party’s Congress in 2017, he declared China was “moving to the centre stage of the world”. In a world witnessing ‘changes unseen in a century’, Xi has declared many a time that ‘the West was declining and the East was rising’. At this conjecture in history, Xi believes that there are opportunities for China—taking the “centre stage”, but at the same time, the global order for Xi represents turmoil or even chaos. And it is amidst this chaos that the Communist Party of China under his leadership which will act as China’s defence and as leading what he calls the country’s ‘great rejuvenation’ or the Chinese dream (Krishnan 2022a). During Xi Jinping’s coronation in 2012 at the 18th Congress of the CPC, the Communist Party newspapers in China were ﬂooded with vigorous coverage of a debate raging between the ‘Left’ and ‘Right’ factions of the party. Both these factions of the Communist Party vehe- mently argued for treading different paths for the country’s future politics. Surprisingly, after a decade later, such debates have become a thing of the past, because no discernible Left or Right factions exist anymore in China. For both editorials and the average Chinese, the past decade also synonymously called as the ‘new era’ (or ‘xin shidai’) stands for one thing: it means the Xi Jinping era and it began in 2012. Plagued by the existential crisis, the Communist Party elders during the transi- tion in 2012 gave Xi Jinping, the mandate to clean the rot. However, in hindsight it can be said that the former leaders got much more than they bargained for. Strong Leader, Makes a Strong Country? According to the theory of Realism, which happens to be one the most dominant theories of international politics, it is the centrality of power that determines states behaviour. States seek power to preserve their exis- tence. There are variations within the realist school on why states seek power. For Classical Realism and Modern Realism, the source lies within human nature (unit-level factor). For Structural Realists (also called neorealists) like Kenneth Waltz, it is the anarchical nature of the inter- national system (structural factor) that propels state to seek power. There is yet another group of scholars within the realist paradigm who seek to bridge the gap between the structural and unit level factors. Gideon Rose categorised these scholars as ‘neoclassical realists’. According to Walt ( 2002), the causal logic of neoclassical realism places domestic politics

13 CHINA’S TRANSITION FROM ‘PEACEFUL RISE’ TO ‘CHINESE … 233 as an intervening variable between distribution of power and foreign policy behaviour (Walt 2002: 11). One important intervening variable is leaders themselves, namely how they perceive the international distribu- tion of power. There is no impartial reading of the distribution of power. Instead, what becomes signiﬁcant is how this distribution of power shapes the perceptions of the state leaders. According to neoclassical realists like Schweller ( 1996) not only do states differ in terms of their interests, but also differ in terms of their ability to extract and direct resources from the society that they rule. Fareed Zakaria ( 1998) introduced the variable of state strength into this version of Realism. State strength is deﬁned as the capability of a state to channelise resources that are available in order to attain certain objectives (Zakaria 1998: 26). Hence, according to the neoclassical theory of Realism, unit level factors like how power is perceived and how leadership is exercised plays a crucial determinant in a state’s foreign policy. It is possible to catalogue Xi Jinping’s perception of power and his political inﬂuence on Chinese domestic politics through this lens of neoclassical realism. Immediately after Xi Jinping took over, anti- corruption campaign was launched to get rid of the massive political and corruption scandals that plagued the party’s ranks. It was this anti- corruption campaign that readied the deck to catapult Xi to a position of strength within the party itself. This move was welcomed by the public who had been wearied by CPC ofﬁcials’ rampant corruption and amassing of disproportionate wealth. The anti-corruption campaign laid down stringent rules for Party members. At the same time, in the garb of ﬁghting and uprooting corruption from the Party ranks, through this campaign, Xi very dexterously purged his political rivals within the Party. Thus gaining a much needed political space which was now rid of the occasional critics, Xi embarked on a ‘massive restructuring of the Party- State’, which he completed in 2018, when a completely new structure of governance was laid out by the CPC that, for the ﬁrst time in decades, ‘brought Party organs out of the shadows’ and positioned them in the secured charge of the State bureaucracy (Krishnan 2022a). The ‘collective leadership’1 model put in place after Deng Xiaoping that saw a division of responsibilities in the top Politburo Standing Committee was also given 1 For a detailed understanding of the collective leadership model followed in China since the Deng Xiaoping era, please see Krishnan. 2020. India’s China Challenge, Noida: HarperCollins, pp.40–42.

234 P . GHOSH a quiet burial. The Premier was no longer at the helm of affairs of the economy. His role was reduced to just presiding over a diminished State bureaucracy. With an objective to end the ‘ﬁefdoms’ that emerged in the Jiang Zemin and Hu Jintao era, and to place the party’s “core” leader in charge of all domains, Xi Jinping diluted the division between the Party and the State. Accordingly, his 2018 reforms declared that the “Party is the highest force for political leadership” (Krishnan 2022a). Xi did not rest at this. The overhaul of the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) was on Xi Jinping’s reform agenda as well. The reform of the PLA was an ambitious project since after Deng Xiaoping, none of the Chinese Presidents have been able to successfully undertake or complete this project. And here too, Xi very adeptly played the anti-corruption campaign card, which struck fear in the Generals after Xi purged the PLA’s two highest-ranking Generals who had been accused of running a ‘pay for post’ military. Commenting on this stupendous task, the PLA Daily described it as ‘the largest scale military reform since the 1950s’. According to Ananth Krishnan, The Hindu’s China correspondent and an well-known China expert, “…the reforms ended the Soviet-style General Staff Departments, disbanding four vast bureaucracies handling staff, poli- tics, logistics and armaments and bringing them under the direct control of the Central Military Commission. Xi’s remaking of the Party-State brought him ﬁrm unchallenged control and removed any and all space for dissent” (Krishnan 2022a). China’s Global ‘Overreach’ Imagine a leader unchallenged, supremely powerful, almost Leviathan like, it is but natural that his foreign policy would reverberate of his might. A part of Xi Jinping’s ‘Chinese dream’ of national rejuvenation is also a qiang guo or a strong country with a strong foreign policy. However, Xi’s worldview suffers from an inherent contradiction. For him, China would be leading the world order but the world itself is apparently full of external threats. It is this contradiction that has determined the trajec- tory of Chinese diplomacy in the past decade. China’s foreign policy appears to be caught between, two opposing spectrum. On the one hand, China strives to present itself as ‘the savior of an UN centred world order’ and on the other, China continues to aggressively and assertively pursue its core interests ever more, regardless of the consequences. This has been aptly demonstrated in Chinese assertiveness ranging from Ladakh

13 CHINA’S TRANSITION FROM ‘PEACEFUL RISE’ TO ‘CHINESE … 235 to the South China Sea to most recently, the waters around Taiwan. This has been dubbed as the ‘wolf warrior’ approach (Krishnan 2022b). It is pertinent here to highlight three issue areas where China’s so-called over- reach under Xi Jinping has been most pronounced having probable global ramiﬁcations and a cascading impact on India per se. B e l t a n dR o a dI n i t i a t i v e Launched in 2013, the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) also referred to as the New Silk Road was President Xi Jinping’s signature foreign policy initiative and a platform to stake China’s claim to global domi- nance. Originally, BRI was conceptualised to be two-pronged: Silk Road Economic Belt stretching over land frontiers and the Maritime Silk Road. BRI is popularly known in China as ‘One Belt One Road’ initiative. The geographical outreach of BRI also signiﬁcantly expanded from a ‘regional to a near-global initiative’, in both of its components. China emphasised that bereft of hegemonic pulls and pressures, the BRI was a new model for trade, partnership and integration and that the principles of multi- lateralism, environment and sustainability were ﬁrmly rooted in the BRI (Luthra 2023). Even though the BRI was envisioned as a vast conglomeration of devel- opment and investment initiatives devised originally for linking (through physical infrastructures) East Asia and Europe, the BRI actually has been used to further a narrative of China’s inevitable global hegemony. As of now, a total of 147 countries—accounting for 40% of the total GDP of the world and two-thirds of the world’s population have inked agree- ments for projects or shown intent in doing so. However, many analysts have criticised China’s lending through the BRI as ‘debt trap diplomacy’ designed to continue China’s economic domination and manipulative strategies against these countries with unsustainable loans and using the debt to gain leverage over those governments and even seize their infras- tructure. As a result, ten years later, today the BRI stands as an ‘inﬂection point’ because it still remains an “amorphous and hard-to-deﬁne initia- tive”, sometimes labelled by political commentators as “a Trojan horse for China-led regional development and military expansion” (Krishnan 2022b; McBride et al., 2023). The rising debt levels in many partner countries are pointers to the long-term unsustainability of these loans. A case in point is that of Sri Lanka, which fell behind in its payment in 2017 over its Hambantota

236 P . GHOSH port. In order to renegotiate the deal, China obtained a 99-year lease on the property. Not only Sri Lanka, Argentina, Malaysia, Pakistan, Kenya, Tanzania and Montenegro are some of the other countries which have found themselves burdened with huge debt overhangs and their debt-to- GDP ratios have reached unsustainable results and have led to balance-of- payments crisis (Bennon and Fukuyama 2023). Many of these countries have been forced to turn towards the International Monetary Fund to ﬁnance these loans, which these countries have incurred as a result of the BRI projects that they entered into. According to a study published by the National Bureau of Economic Research (Cambridge), approximately half of China’s loans to developing countries are ‘hidden’ meaning that they are not included in the ofﬁcial statistics. Such hidden debts have resulted in a series of ‘hidden defaults’ (Horn et al., 2019). However, it is well known that China had other objectives while funding for the BRI projects. And these objectives were not just economic but also political and strategic, including gaining political inﬂuence and access to strategic resources. Criticism aside, not all BRI projects have underperformed. Greece’s Piraeus port project has delivered the outcomes for both the partner countries and examples like these have only bolstered Beijing’s successful overreach. The fact that indebted partners have only returned to China for more assistance underscores the reality of China’s politico-economic muscle. The cases of both Pakistan and Sri Lanka drive home this truth. Both these countries have received more than $26 billion from China in the past ﬁve years, and dealing with ﬁnancial crises, are once again turning not only to the IMF but also to Beijing. China-US Rivalry With the Obama administration in October 2011 announcing its strategic pivot to Asia, it has been widely argued that a major driver for this US rebalancing has been the rise of China. One of the prominent highlights of the trajectory of China’s foreign policy under Xi Jinping has been the rising China-US rivalry and the deepening ties with Russia. Relations with Washington reached its nadir during the Donald Trump administration. During the COVID-19 pandemic, which was thought to be the next ‘Suez moment’ for the United States, China positioned itself in trying to ﬁll the power vacuum created by the crisis in leadership in Wash- ington (Campbell and Rush, 2020). China tried to project itself as the

13 CHINA’S TRANSITION FROM ‘PEACEFUL RISE’ TO ‘CHINESE … 237 saviour of an UN centred world order which in its views Donald Trump and US foreign policy in general was trying to topple. In the race to be the new global hegemon, during the pandemic, through its well crafted and deftly manoeuvred strategies of providing material assistance to the affected countries, Beijing was ﬁrmly placed at a vantage point of being a serious contender for the United States in the competition for global leadership. This was especially highlighted by Xi Jinping in many of his recent speeches, wherein he has time and again referred to a world facing two paths—one of chaos caused by “small cliques”, as China refers to the United States and its allies, primarily hinting at the Quad (short form for the Quadrilateral Security Dialogue that involves United States, Japan, Australia and India) and the other his ‘community of shared destiny’ (Krishnan 2022b). For Beijing, on the other side of US-China rivalry has been the newfound bonhomie with Russia. China’s present relations with Russia have been described by the Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov as being ‘the best in history’, as well as a declaration in February 2021, on the eve of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine (which has yet not been condemned by China), of a relationship with ‘no limits’ (Krishnan 2022c). With an objective to blunt the criticism of Chinese assertive claims in the South China Sea and its aggressive posturing in the Indo- Paciﬁc region, China has tried to warm up to its Southeast Asian neigh- bours through its economic diplomacy in the region. However, the recent military manoeuvres against Taiwan in the past few months have under- scored Beijing’s renewed emphasis on protecting China’s ‘sovereignty’ and its core interests. Such moves have undercut China’s broader geopo- litical ambitions. India has been long considered by Beijing as a crucially signiﬁcant ‘swing power’, but a country with which ties have plummeted since April 2020 after the Doklam crisis. India-China Relationship The Galwan valley stand-off between India and China marked an “impla- cable decline in India-China ties” (Gokhale 2021). The bilateral relations have plunged to the lowest levels since the normalisation of ties in the 1980s during the Rajiv Gandhi era. Multiple transgressions by the PLA at the Sino-Indian border in the western sector have triggered tensions in the recent past between the two sides which still continues, unabated. India’s relations with China during Xi Jinping’s tenure can at best be

238 P . GHOSH characterised as ‘see-sawing’, wherein from the highs of two ‘informal summits’ in Wuhan in 2018 and Mamallapuram in 2019 it straightway nosedived after the Galwan valley clash in June 2020. A notable feature of Chinese foreign policy during the presidency of Xi Jinping has been that territorial problems with neighbours are now seen as ‘threats to China’s ‘sovereignty’ and not as ‘disputes’ that could be mutually resolved. This diminishes both the scope and space for ﬁnding political solutions. With India getting close to Washington in the past few years, Beijing’s equations with New Delhi have been viewed through the lens of the great power rivalry between China and the United States. The most recent case in point has been Xi Jinping’s conscpicuous absence from the G-20 summit in New Delhi in September 2023. Even though China’s chair was not left vacant, it was the Chinese Premier Li Qiang and not President Xi who occupied the seat at the G-20 New Delhi summit. China has usually placed special emphasis on G-20, viewing it as an important platform to shape the global order and exert its rising clout. However, many political observers were of the opinion that China’s absence without providing any acceptable reason was a deliberate signal to India and the West and was a ‘clearly well thought out’decision and not a ‘routine’ one (Krishnan 2023). Scholars have forecasted gloomy days ahead for Sino-Indian relations, wherein under Xi, the coming ﬁve years are more likely to be charac- terised by an ‘ever-sharper period of tensions with the West’, the tremors of which are most likely to be felt in China’s immediate neighbourhood and in its relations with India (Krishnan 2022b). Anti-western feelings ran high when the Chinese Foreign Ministry criticised the United States for visit of the US House Speaker Nancy Pelosi to Taiwan in August 2022. The Chinese Foreign Ministry said, “They clearly believe they live in the time of 120 years ago…today’s China is not the old China of 100 years ago that was humiliated and bullied”. The ministry even went to the extent of drawing a parallel between the G7 and the alliance of eight nations that invaded China in 1900 and marked a “century of humil- iation” (Foreign Ministry, People’s Republic of China, 2022). China through its project of ‘national rejuvenation’ or the Chinese dream will seek to bury these memories and that is a bold assertion that Xi Jinping is all determined to achieve during his reign.

13 CHINA’S TRANSITION FROM ‘PEACEFUL RISE’ TO ‘CHINESE … 239 Conclusion In the latest issue (September/October 2023) of Foreign Affairs, Johnson (2023) in his very interestingly titled article ‘Xi’s Age of Stagna- tion: The Great Walling Off of China’ has observed that over the past one year the Chinese government under Xi Jinping has lurched from crisis to crisis. A continuous period of slow economic growth together with the public anger and the resulting anti-government protests in Guangzhou, Chengdu, Shanghai and Beijing against Xi Jinping’s grossly unpopular zero-COVID-19 policy have brought out in full public glare the unpopu- larity of Xi Jinping in China. Although Xi Jinping won an unprecedented third term as Chinese President, suddenly the public mistrust which is higher than ever before, has turned Xi’s ‘Chinese dream’ into a night- mare. Consequently, as many analysts have argued, it was expected that Xi would loosen his tight grip over the Chinese society and economy. But none of that actually happened. Although COVID restrictions are gone, strict government intervention still continues. Ian Johnson seeks to explain this phenomenon as ‘the new national statis’ or what Chinese call ‘neijuan’. According to Johnson, neijuan can be deﬁned as life twisting inwards without real progress. He argues that this walling-off now perme- ates every aspect of the Chinese life under Xi Jinping, leaving the country more isolated and stagnant than any period since Deng launched his reforms in the late 1970s (Johnson 2023). However, in the past, every time the party faced a crisis, it survived, as it was quick to adapt and experiment. In the aftermath of Mao’s death, the party faced with a leadership crisis relaxed its grip on society and China opened up. During the Tiananmen massacre too, the party was quick to understand that crises such as these could only be averted by economic progress. This so-called adaptative authoritarianism best characterised the leaders of the erstwhile generation who believed that the country was prone to large-scale crisis and needed course correction every time it faced such challenges. But Xi Jinping’s China is of a different breed. Self-critical reﬂection is a thing of the past in China now. In China’s inward turn, many Chinese scholars have already started seeing a replication of the constrained atmosphere that characterised the countries of the Eastern bloc during the Cold War (Johnson 2023). It cannot be said for certain if Beijing’s bet to turn inward and succeed on its own in order to withstand the pressure of an uncertain world will pay off. However, the thing that can be said with certainty is that if

240 P . GHOSH the party’s successes in dealing with these challenges may, as its media reminds, rest on Xi, so will its failures in future. Both the domestic and the international environments that Xi currently faces are signiﬁcantly worse than in 2012 when he took ofﬁce as the Party’s general secre- tary. China is undergoing an economic slowdown which has resulted in faltering conﬁdence on the Chinese economic growth story. On the other hand, the looming debt and China’s geostrategic competition with the United States and its allies is jeopardizing the future of China’s economic growth and also its technological progression. As a result, policymaking is becoming increasingly volatile, as China’s increasing challenges is making it harder for Xi to strike that ﬁne balance between the Party’s ideolog- ical agenda and the reality of replicating the golden past of unbridled economic growth. In order to rein in this volatility, China needs to focus on three balancing acts: growth with security in economic policy; the political and diplomatic tussle against the United States for global lead- ership along with avoiding ‘economic decoupling’ from the West; and within the domestic sphere balancing the competing elite factions. In conclusion, going by the Fareed Zakarian logic of state strength being a determining factor in a state’s foreign policy, how much of that ability to mobilise and direct resources at his disposal in the pursuit of the ‘Chinese dream’ Xi Jinping will be able to demonstrate, remains a pertinent question. Xi has his task cut out and will have a tough road to tread in the coming days. These looming challenges in the garb of slowing economic growth, uncertainty in governance and an ever- increasing hostile international environment, if left uncontrolled, are more likely to make the ‘Chinese dream’ of national rejuvenation the Chinese nightmare of national stagnation. References Bennon, M., and F. Fukuyama. 2023, August 22. The Real Toll of Beijing’s Belt and Road. Foreign Affairs. https://www.foreignaffairs.com/china/belt-road- initiative-xi-imf. Bijian, Z. 2005, March 23. China’s ‘peaceful rise’ to great-power status. Foreign Affairs (2): 18–24. https://www.jstor.org/stable/20031702 Bijian, Z. 2013, March 23. China’s road of peaceful development and the building of communities of interests. Speech Given at 5th World Forum on China Studies. Shanghai Academy of Social Sciences, Shanghai. http://www. chinastudies.org.cn/e/617.html.

13 CHINA’S TRANSITION FROM ‘PEACEFUL RISE’ TO ‘CHINESE … 241 Campbell, K. M. and Rush D. 2020, March 18. The coronavirus could reshape global order. Foreign Affairs,9 9( 2 ) . https://www.foreignaffairs.com/art icles/china/2020-03-18/coronavirus-couldreshapeglobalorder. China’s Peaceful Development. 2011, September. White paper, information ofﬁce of the state council. The People’s Republic of China. Beijing. http://english. gov.cn/official/2011-09/06/content_1941354.html Cooley, A.; and Daniel, H. N. 2020, June 9. How hegemony ends: The unrav- eling of American power. Foreign Affairs, July/August 2020. https://www. foreignaffairs.com/articles/united-states/2020-06-09/how-hegemony-ends Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Hua Chunying’s Regular Press Conference 2022, August 4. http://is.china-embassy.gov.cn/eng/fyrth/202208/t20220 805_10734891.html. Gokhale, V. 2021, March 10. The road from Galwan: The future of India- China relations. Carnegie India. https://carnegieindia.org/2021/03/10/ road-from-galwan-future-of-india-china-relations-pub-84019. Horn, S., Carmen M. R. and Trebeschn, C. 2019, July. China’s overseas lending. NBER National Bureau of Economic Research. Working Paper Series, Working Paper 26050. Cambridge. https://www.nber.org/system/ﬁles/wor king_papers/w26050/w26050.pdf. Jinping, Xi. 2012, November 29. Achieving rejuvenation is the dream of the Chinese people. http://www.npc.gov.cn/englishnpc/c23934/202006/ 32191c5bbdb04cbab6df01e5077d1c60.shtml. Johnson, I. 2023, August 22. Xi’s age of stagnation: The great walling-off of China. Foreign Affairs. https://www.foreignaffairs.com/china/xi-jinping- age-stagnation. Krishnan, A. 2020. India’s China challenge: A journey through China’s rise and what it means for India. HarperCollins. Krishnan, A. 2022a, October 10. How Xi remade China’s party-state. The Hindu. https://www.thehindu.com/news/international/how-xi-remade-chi nas-party-state/article65994214.ece. Krishnan A. 2022b, October 12. China’s ‘wolf warrior’ era. The Hindu. https:// www.thehindu.com/news/international/chinas-wolf-warrior-era/article66 002772.ece. Krishnan, A. 2022c, December 30. Putin, Xi hail ‘best in history’ ties, commit to deepen relations. The Hindu. https://www.thehindu.com/news/internati onal/putin-xi-hail-best-in-history-ties-commit-to-deepen-relations/article66 321930.ece. Krishnan, A. 2023, September 6. Xi Jinping skipping G-20 Summit a deliberate signal to India, West. The Hindu. Kurlantzick, J. 2007. Charm offensive: How China’s soft power is transforming the world. Yale University Press.

242 P . GHOSH Luthra, G. 2023, August 25. China’s belt and road initiative at a crucial juncture. Observer Research Foundation. https://www.orfonline.org/expert-speak/chi nas-belt-and-road-initiative-at-a-crucial-juncture/ McBride, J.; Noah B. and A. Chatzky. 2023, February 2. China’s massive belt a n dr o a di n i t i a t i v e . Council on Foreign Relations. https://www.cfr.org/backgr ounder/chinas-massive-belt-and-road-initiative Mingjiang, L. 2008, September 1. Soft power in Chinese discourse: Popularity and prospect. S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies, 165. http:// www.rsis.edu.sg/publications/WorkingPapers/WP165.pdf Pathak, Sriparna. 2015, October 15. The peace in China’s peaceful rise. E- International Relations. https://www.e-ir.info/2015/10/15/the-peace-in- chinas-peaceful-rise/ Schweller, R. 1996. Neo-realism’s Status-quo bias: What security Dimemma? Security Studies 5: 90–121. Shirk, S. L. 2022. Overreach: How china derailed its peaceful rise. Oxford University Press. Walt, S. M. 2002. The enduring relevance of the realist tradition.W WN o r t o n Company. Zakaria, F. 1998. From wealth to power: The unusual origins of America’s world role. Princeton University Press.

CHAPTER 14 China’s Geoeconomic Manoeuvrings in Southeast Asia: Security Challenges and Implications Tilottama Mukherjee It is indeed a reality that China has the ‘economic centrality’ to the Southeast Asian region. However, the survey report entitled ‘The State of Southeast Asia 2022’ conducted by the Singapore’s ISEAS-Yusof Ishak Institute revealed that despite China being the leading economic power in the region: Japan remains the most trusted major power among Southeast Asians (54.2%), followed by the US (52.8%) and the European Union (48.5%). An appalling 58.1% expressed distrust towards China, and 49.6% of those who distrust China fear that China could use economic and military power to threaten the country’s interest and sovereignty. This was despite the fact that the overwhelming majority in the survey concluded that China is the most inﬂuential economic and political power. This survey was T. Mukherjee (B) Syamaprasad College, University of Calcutta, Kolkata, India e-mail: tilottamamukherjee@yahoo.com © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapor e Pte Ltd. 2024 O. Mishra and S. Sen (eds.), Global Political Economy, Geopolitics and International Security , https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-97-2231-0_14 243

244 T. MUKHERJEE done on 1677 respondents from across the 10 ASEAN member countries (ISEAS-YusofIshak Institute Survey Report 2022). The question that arises here is that if there is any possible way to understand if the mistrust for China has increased over the years or the increasing levels of economic engagement is helping China to improve its image and inﬂuence among the Southeast Asians. Well, China has enjoyed relative popularity as a rising Asian country in the 1990s till the ﬁrst two decades of the new millennium. However, China under Presi- dent Xi Jinping has been following a diplomatic style vis-à-vis the smaller countries, popularly known as the ‘wolf warrior’ style of diplomacy. It is perceived to be assertive, confrontational, combative and coercive. It is in sharp contrast to what President Deng Xiaoping believed in. His style of leadership was calm observance, steadfastly coping with China’s international affairs by hiding its intent and being good at maintaining a low proﬁle. Deng propagated the dictum taoguang yang hui. It roughly means ‘keeping a low proﬁle and biding time, while getting something accomplished’ (Youyi 2011). But, the China under President Xi is “more conﬁdent and more capable than ever before” (Kurlantzick 2006: 270–276). During the Cold War years, the Southeast Asian countries were suspicious of China as Maoist China was supporting communists in Thailand, Malaysia and most signiﬁcantly the Khmer regime in Cambodia. The Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) was established in 1967 to thwart the advance of communism in the region. However, after analysing the avail- able literature of the post-Cold War years it can be understood that since the late 1990s, perceptions of China in Southeast Asia had started to shift signiﬁcantly in favour of China. As a plausible explanation, it can be said that, China had beneﬁted from missteps by the US and Japan, ranging from the 1997 Asian ﬁnancial crisis to Washington’s post- 9/11 focus on counter- terrorism in Southeast Asia. But the transformation also stems from a rise in China’s soft power in Southeast Asia, that is, China’s ability to inﬂuence Southeast Asian countries by persuasion, rather than coercion. China was extending its soft power to the region through various means, such as culture, diplomacy, business actions, and participation in multilat- eral organisations and portraying its economic strength which will extend the gravitational pull to other neighbouring countries (Kurlantzick 2006: 270–276).

14 CHINA’S GEOECONOMIC MANOEUVRINGS IN SOUTHEAST … 245 T he South China Sea Imbroglio: High Stakes for Southeast Asia However, the President Xi-led China has been far more assertive in accomplishing what it feels would be in their best national interest. This is why some of the activities of China are being construed as ‘threats’ by other smaller countries. For instance, China’s sweeping claims over the South China Sea. The South China Sea is a moderately enclosed sea, about 3.5 million square kilometres in area, extending from the Singa- pore Strait to the Taiwan Strait. Geo-strategically located between the Paciﬁc Ocean and the Indian Ocean, about one-third of the world’s shipping takes place through its waters. It is situated in the South of China and has the islands of Taiwan and the Philippines in its east. It has Vietnam and Cambodia towards its west and Singapore, Malaysia and Brunei in its south (Chakraborti and Bhattacharya 2012: 2). The South China Sea issue has been ﬂaring up at regular intervals from the latter half of the previous century because eight states have been claiming sovereignty to these islands. Singapore and Malaysia have been disputing sovereignty claims over Pisang Island and Pulau Batu Puteh. China, Taiwan and Vietnam contest each other’s claims to sovereignty over the Paracels, a group of ﬁfteen islets and several reefs and shoals scattered over a 200 km area in the northern South China Sea. Today China is in possession of all the islands in the Paracels as it had captured those from South Vietnam in 1974. Taiwan also contests China’s claims to Pratas Island and Macclesﬁeld Bank. Seven states assert their claims on the Spratly archipelago. Whereas China, Taiwan and Vietnam claim the entire archipelago, Indonesia, Philippines, Malaysia and Brunei claim sovereignty over portions of it. Except Brunei and Indonesia, all the others have established a military presence in the Spratlys (Puri and Sehgal 2011: 438). In fact, the People’s Republic of China has been claiming complete sovereignty over the entire South China Sea region, citing the presence of historical documents that apparently prove Chinese interaction with this region from time immemorial and China has put forward the concept of ‘nine dash/dotted lines’ extending over the entire South China Sea region to back up its claims of sovereignty. Vietnam and China already had two armed skirmishes with each other in 1974 and 1988 on the South China Sea issue and continue to be embroiled in regular scufﬂes on this issue. Though these countries are bound by the United Nations Convention

246 T. MUKHERJEE on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS III), 1982 and ASEAN’s Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea (DOC), 1992 based on the principles of peace and tranquillity in the region as per the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation (TAC), there have been frequent untoward incidents leading to even loss of lives, owing to contested sovereignty claims in the region. Time and again, Chinese ‘aggressive’ postures have been reported such as, the Chinese PLA-N building artiﬁcial island on the Mischief Reef in the Spratlys, deploying Romeo-class conventional submarines in the disputed region; Chinese ships ﬁring on Vietnamese ﬁshing boats in the South China Sea; Chinese plans to begin tourist cruises to Paracels; China placing boundary markers on the Paracels; China creating a country-level city called Sansha in the Hainan province to administer its claims in the South China Sea; China cutting the exploration cables of Binh Minh 02 seismic vessel of Vietnam National Oil and Gas, and so on (Thayer 2010: 401–404). China has fully militarised at least three of the several islands it built in the disputed South China Sea, arming them with anti-ship and anti-aircraft missile systems, laser and jamming equipment and ﬁghter jets (The Guardian 2022). The Philippines, in February 2023, accused China of using a powerful laser against one of its ships on a resupply mission at Second Thomas Shoal which reportedly has blinded its crew (Al Jazeera 2023). This is despite the fact that in 2016, the International Court of Justice (ICJ) ruled that there was no legal basis for China to claim historical rights to resources within the sea areas falling in the proposed nine-dash line. Beijing refused to accept such a ruling and subsequently rejected it. An international ruling seems to be of no effect in containing China’s belligerent posture in the region. Besides this, with Laos, China claims large parts of its territory, appar- ently based on historical reasons, presumably dating back to the Yuan Dynasty. Furthermore, China and Myanmar share over 2000 km-long border, not least, Myanmar has often accused China of creating trouble on the border and instigating insurgent groups. So, pondering over the question as to why China suffers from trust deﬁcit among its neighbours in the region—besides these maritime and territorial disputes which seem to be the obvious reason—there is also the opinion that China has been failing to accept the fact that Southeast Asians want their region to remain as an open region. The Southeast Asian countries, consequently, do not want to willingly fall into the sphere of inﬂuence of any one particular regional hegemon, be it an Asian state

14 CHINA’S GEOECONOMIC MANOEUVRINGS IN SOUTHEAST … 247 or otherwise. Centuries of struggle against colonial powers have made sovereignty sacrosanct to them, and they would not barter their political autonomy for securing economic beneﬁts (Jaknanihan 2022). If we look at some crude statistics, we will see that China’s trade volume with the ten members of the ASEAN has nearly doubled from $443 billion in 2013 to a whopping $878 billion in 2021. During the same period of time, however, Beijing has also built over 3200 acres of artiﬁcial landmass and fully militarised at least three islands in the South China Sea (Business Standard 2022). Arguably, had China not exhibited such a heavy-handed attitude, it may have been able to utilise its economic inﬂuence as the source of trust. ‘China Dream’ and the ‘Debt-T rap’ in Southeast Asia Over the past decades, as a result of its unparalleled economic success and mammoth connectivity projects, China is becoming increasingly central in world politics. In the October 2017 Report to the Chinese Commu- nist Party’s 19th Congress, President Xi Jinping stated that by 2050, China will have “become a global leader in terms of composite national strength and international inﬂuence” (Xinhua 2017). China’s activities have given birth to worldwide apprehensions regarding its strategy of expansionism through lending or investments in other countries. There are concerns that China’s capital transfers to these countries are actu- ally tools or efforts to ensnare these countries in debt-traps so that their vulnerability could be exploited and their resources be brought under Beijing’s control. An example may sufﬁce: at the time when Myanmar was reeling under the military Junta regime and was under signiﬁcant western sanctions, China’s clout in the country continued to grow phenomenally. In 2009, China ﬁnalised and ﬁnanced the construction of the Myitsone Dam on the Irrawaddy River in the Kachin State. However, after much protest from the citizens of Myanmar over a number of issues such as environmental consequences, ﬂooding and unacceptably unfair sharing of electricity output between the two countries, the project was ﬁnally stalled by the Thein Sein administration, in September 2011. It was an estimated $3.6 billion project and since Myanmar could not repay China’s loans for the aborted project, the latter imposed upon the former a repayment regime in the form of equity in all the new dams in the country. It has helped China to consolidate its foothold over Naypyidaw.

248 T. MUKHERJEE A mention, in this context must, also be made of Laos. Laos is a country for which China remains the largest source of development assis- tance and investment. As part of the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), China and Laos made known their plans of constructing a high speed railway track through Laos. China is going overboard in projecting that the proposed railway track, once put into operation, will be of huge beneﬁt to the host country as it will turn Laos from a landlocked to a land-linked country. The railway track will originate at the Yunnan Province and will terminate at Singapore after running through Laos. Despite the popular narrative, the actual fact remains that it is China which will actually greatly beneﬁt by this railway track as it will link China’s Yunnan Province directly to Laos, Thailand, Malaysia and Singapore, allowing Chinese goods to ﬂood their markets very easily and quickly. This railway project costs $6 billion. Laos, only for this one project, has over $1.5 billion debt to the EXIM Bank of China. The total debt Laos owes to China is estimated to be around 45% of its GDP (Freeman 2019). The developing countries are in perpetual need of investments for their infrastructural development. In this situation, China appears to them as a quick and easy source of investment. There is a limit to how much a country will be provided with loans, as long as it deals with agencies like the IMF. Besides, the IMF has stringent conditions for sanctioning loans, such as, it checks for a country’s credit worthiness, or its ability to repay loans. Here, China seems to be a more lenient donor. But, the problem reportedly starts when a country defaults, a phenomenon which has been accentuated since the BRI was announced. We must note here that 42 developing countries including 4 in Southeast Asia, namely, Laos, Brunei, Cambodia and Myanmar, have public debt exposure to China in excess of 10% of their GDPs (Davidson 2021). Belt and Road: Some Implications for Southeast Asia China has been going overdrive in trying to build a global economic system with itself as the core of such a system. Accordingly, China is trying to revive the ‘maritime silk route’ which is the maritime portion of the historic Silk Route. This idea was formally announced for the ﬁrst time by Chinese President Xi Jinping in his speech when he visited Central Asia and Southeast Asia in September and October 2013, in which he raised the initiative of jointly building the Silk Road Economic Belt and

14 CHINA’S GEOECONOMIC MANOEUVRINGS IN SOUTHEAST … 249 the 21st-Century Maritime Silk Road (Belt and Road) in the Indone- sian Parliament. Once again at the China-ASEAN Expo in 2013, Premier Le Keqiang highlighted the necessity to build the Maritime Silk Road directed towards the ASEAN and to generate deliberate propellers for neighbourhood development (Ministry of Foreign Affairs, China 2015). The proposed Maritime Silk Route will run through and connect China’s Fujian Province, Guangdong, Guangxi, Hainan, the Malacca Strait, Kula Lumpur, Kolkata, Colombia; passing through the rest of Indian Ocean it will connect Nairobi, Horn of Africa, Red Sea, the Mediterranean and Venice and then will ﬁnally connect with the land segment of the Silk Route (Chaturvedy 2017). The Silk Road Economic Belt focuses on bringing together China, Central Asia, Russia and Europe by linking China with the Persian Gulf and the Mediterranean Sea through Central Asia and West Asia, not least, connecting China with Southeast Asia, South Asia and the Indian Ocean. It will connect China with Europe through the South China Sea and the Indian Ocean in one way, and in another direction, it will connect China with the South China Sea and the South Paciﬁc (Ministry of Foreign Affairs, China 2015). Thus, it is an extremely ambitious project joining several countries and continents with China’s provinces. China has been trying its best to make this project proﬁtable to host coun- tries and has thus, termed this initiative to be ‘harmonious and lucrative’, fostering ‘a multi polar world’ with ‘open regional cooperation’. It has been actively promoting this proposal by visiting countries and garnering support in this regard so that the concept of ‘peaceful rise’ of China does not take a beating (The Economic Times 2018). For furthering China’s economic growth story, it needs a constant inﬂow of energy supplies and the BRI purports to establish an energy corridor for China. One such project within the BRI is the Myanmar-China crude oil pipeline, which was operationalised in 2017 with the objective of enabling China to import crude oil from West Asia and Africa without having to ship its supplies through the Strait of Malacca and the disputed South China Sea region. The pipeline measures 30 metres in width and covers a distance of 793 km. The Myanmar-China Pipeline Watch Committee—the only civil society organisation which has been monitoring the social impact of this Project—is of the opinion that huge stretches of lush green agricultural lands have been taken away from the farmers in Myanmar for this project, and without adhering to an adequate and transparent compensation policy. Moreover, there is rampant soil erosion along the pipeline resulting

250 T. MUKHERJEE in damage to water resources, which may subsequently cause further envi- ronmental degradation (Project Report of the Myanmar-China Pipeline Watch Committee 2015). Foreign investments in Southeast Asia origi- nating from China have grown 20-fold from 2005 to 2019 (Goh and Nan, 2021) but it is equally true that Southeast Asia’s growing economic linkages with China have been generating strategic concerns in equal measure. Analysts and scholars have often pointed out how Vietnam has been following a ‘hedging strategy’ vis-à-vis China as far as the BRI is concerned: in so far as avoiding opposition with the PRC, avoiding dependence on it, agreeing to and defying PRC as and when the situa- tion demands, and simultaneously diversifying relations with other major powers. On a number of projects, Vietnam has started distancing itself from China. For example, reportedly, Hanoi has denied Chinese funding for the Van Don-Mong Cai highway, owing to national security concerns as Mong Cai is a city near Vietnam’s border with China. Furthermore, Vietnam has opted out Chinese Huawei involvement in its 5G infras- tructural development. Instead, Vietnam is now endeavouring to put in place its own 5G model (Trinh and Hui, 2023). President Tran Dai Quang, while welcoming the BRI in the First Belt and Road Forum in Beijing in May 2017, emphasised that the BRI must ensure “sus- tainability, effectiveness and inclusiveness, openness, mutual respect and beneﬁts, and compliance with the UN Charter and international law” (Ao 2019). It is because of the thorny issues in Sino-Vietnam relations and the lack of political trust that it became necessary for President Quang to reiterate the principles of cooperation expected from China during the implementation of the BRI. It has also been reported that the govern- ment of Philippines led by President Ferdinand Marcos has cancelled the rail projects that were concluded with China by the previous adminis- tration under President Rodrigo Duterte, and the Marcos government has made its plans of renegotiating the terms with China about ﬁnancing those cancelled projects (Preston 2022). Similarly, in Malaysia, Presi- dent Mahathir Mohammad, after assuming ofﬁce in 2019, announced the cancellation of some of the key BRI projects and put pressure on the Chinese leadership to meet at the negotiating table for reworking on the terms of ﬁnancing and for slashing the cost of the projects, in case Beijing wants to revive those stalled projects. For instance, Malaysia cancelled the 688 km-long East Coast Rail Link and also a natural gas pipeline in the eastern State of Sabah. The administration cancelled or deferred some

14 CHINA’S GEOECONOMIC MANOEUVRINGS IN SOUTHEAST … 251 US$23 billion worth of projects awarded to Chinese companies by the previous government (Ao 2019). The implementation of the BRI projects by the Chinese companies is also exacerbating the existing ethnic cleavages in the Southeast Asian societies. For instance, the Morowali Industrial Park (IMIP) project in Indonesia is noteworthy in this context. It is a 5000-hectare fully inte- grated smelting and Manufacturing Park in the Central Sulawesi regency. The Torajas, a Southern Sulawesi ethnic group, have been brought to work in the smelters. But IMIP hired other ethnic groups that do not get along with the Torajas, so that the Indonesian workers cannot collectively mobilise against the Chinese IMIP (Ismail and Camba 2022). China’s Hydro-politics in Southeast Asia A mention must also be made of how Southeast Asia is paying the price for China’s dam-building frenzy to meet its own energy requirements necessary to propel its economic growth. Also, it is a fact that one way of wielding power is by controlling resources needed by other coun- tries. This is one critical issue which is emerging to be very important in China’s relations with its smaller neighbours, in the new millennium. The Mekong River originates in China and passes through lower riparian states like Myanmar, Laos, Thailand, Cambodia and ultimately Vietnam, before it joins the South China Sea. Therefore, any activity by China as the upper riparian state will have direct spill over effect on these Southeast Asian states. China completed its ﬁrst hydro-electric dam on the Mekong, the Manwan Dam, in 1955. Over the years, China has built not less than 11 hydropower dam projects in the upper Mekong basin, and many more dams have been planned to be built by China in the near future. It has built hundreds of dams on the tributaries of the Mekong. This dam-building frenzy has caused severe crisis in Vietnam’s water reserve as the Mekong has always been its lifeline. These mainstream dams have created decreased water ﬂows from the upstream, thereby aggravating the salinity of the Mekong River in Vietnam and have been generating anxiety in the Vietnamese government to provide adequate fresh water supplies to its population. Apart from difﬁculties in providing freshwater, the government is also very much worried about the ecological diversity, the agricultural output and the ecological balance in the Mekong Delta. It therefore does not come as a surprise that in the year 2016, Vietnam

252 T. MUKHERJEE had to face a major drought situation. About 80 per cent of Vietnam’s total rice produced for export comes from the Mekong Delta. As China has pledged to achieve net-zero carbon emissions by 2060, making arrangements for hydro-electricity by building more and more dams on the Mekong and its tributaries remains one of the most viable options before China to meet its goal of providing clean energy for the country. The numbers and varieties of ﬁsh have decreased drastically over the years. The ﬂood seasons aren’t following the same pattern anymore; about 20 per cent of the world’s freshwater ﬁsh used to be supplied from Mekong, which has been badly hit today. A study from the US- based climate consultant Eyes on Earth informs us that for six months in 2019, China’s dams blocked an unprecedented amount of water from entering the lower Mekong. The amount of water withheld was so large that, for the ﬁrst time since modern records have been kept; there was no monsoon-driven rise in water levels just over the Chinese border in Chiang Saen, Thailand. China has been restricting more and more water over time—particularly during the monsoon seasons—since its behemoth Nuozhadu Dam was institutionalised. Reportedly, the level of the mainstream is falling so steeply that irri- gation pumps are not reaching to that level, which has thereby, badly hit the irrigation sector. The Thai government, for instance, had to conduct relief efforts by deploying its army because of this. This may snowball into a massive food crisis in Southeast Asia (Eyler 2020). As per the research conducted by the Mekong Region Futures Institute and the International Rivers Hydro Scorecard, around 55% of all Chinese over- seas dam investments are in Asia; of that, 55% i.e. around 73% are in Southeast Asia. Within the Mekong Basin alone, 81% of overseas Chinese dams are in Laos. According to POWERCHINA, which is China’s leading hydropower developer, planned dams in Laos are expressly marketed and designed to power the construction of China-Laos Railway Project, which is an integral part of the BRI (Guerreiro 2021). So, the socio-economic effects of these dams will be borne by these lower riparian states, the host countries, to apparently fuel the ‘China Dream’ of President Xi. As a result of deep-seated political distrust for China, several South- east Asian countries have been improving relations with other countries, such as Japan, India, Australia, France and the USA, who can possibly act as re-balancers in the region. For instance, Japan has challenged China’s sovereignty claims in the Senkaku/Diaoyu Islands. The People’s Liberation Army’s (PLA) announcement, in November 2013, of an Air

14 CHINA’S GEOECONOMIC MANOEUVRINGS IN SOUTHEAST … 253 Defence Identiﬁcation Zone (ADIZ) over the East China Sea region that overlapped the Japanese, the South Korean and Taiwanese zones was a momentous development in this context which angered Japan signiﬁ- cantly. Since 2007 and particularly since the time of announcement of the Maritime Silk Road project, the USA, Japan, India and Australia have been holding talks to collaborate, for coming together on a single platform and they could ﬁnally do so by forming the ‘Quad’ or the ‘Quadrilateral Security Dialogue’. Interestingly, the Vietnamese Navy has participated in the Malabar joint naval exercises of these countries, which are normally held in the Malabar Coast, off Bay of Bengal, much to the chagrin of China. China has even labelled Vietnam as a ‘shadow member’ of the Quad. With the aim to curb China’s growing military inﬂuence in Southeast Asia, India and select ASEAN countries have begun holding joint military exer- cises. The Indian Navy has been regularly conducting joint military and naval exercises not only with Vietnam but also with Singapore, Japan, South Korea, Indonesia and Malaysia to ensure the safety of the strategic waterways in the region such as Straits of Malacca and Isthmus Kra. India and Vietnam have also engaged in the PASSEX Naval exer- cises that include signal drills, surface manoeuvres and communications, thereby inviting much wrath of China as it regards the Indo-Paciﬁc region as vital to its security. Vietnam has welcomed greater American involve- ment in the South China Sea, while Philippines, Indonesia, Malaysia, Taiwan and Brunei have subscribed to a similar stance. On 16 April 2013, China released its eighth white paper on defence. Among other things pertinent to this discussion, the most crucial feature of this document was the declaration that China will play a greater role in the global affairs. It also critiqued the American rebalancing postures in the Indo-Paciﬁc. Moreover, not only did it term the South China Sea as its ‘core inter- est’—which eventually led to 12 out of 27 countries criticising the move in the ASEAN Regional Forum—it also hailed and lauded the trailing incidents of USS Impeccable in 2009 and USS Cowpens in 2013 by the Chinese Navy in the South China Sea (Kondapalli 2008,3 – 6 ) . Not surprisingly, even the Chinese Confucius Institutes have received mixed reactions from the common Southeast Asian people. These insti- tutes are bodies that promote Chinese language and culture in other countries. Beijing has been pushing these institutes as part of development of its bilateral relations with other countries. Ofﬁcial Chinese government estimates inform us that more than 500 such institutes have been opened

254 T. MUKHERJEE in 140 countries. In Southeast Asia, till the beginning of 2017, China had set up 31 Confucius Institutes as well as four Chinese Cultural Centres in Thailand, Singapore, Laos and Cambodia (Parameswaran 2017). Why would these countries need to open branches of such institutes for the promotion of Chinese language, culture and way of life on their soil is not known with certainty, and therefore, the reception has been mixed with some iota of suspicion surely present. Conclusion In sum, then, it can be said that China led by President Xi Jinping is being criticised for following a style of diplomacy which is too ‘aggressive’ in matters which Beijing construes to be in its ‘core interest’. Even though it insists on its ‘peaceful rise’, the PLA hawks have been regularly rattling their sabres and China has been engaging in covert and overt manoeuvres in South China Sea, to further its own interest, turning a deaf ear to the complaints of its neighbouring countries and blatantly ﬂouting interna- tional norms. The Southeast Asian countries have found themselves to be at the receiving ends of how the ‘China Dream’ is being played out. Even though, these countries overwhelmingly believe that China is a crucial economic and political player in the region, there is much apprehension about the dubious nature of economic partnerships with China, since it is in a position to dictate the terms of partnership with these smaller countries. China-funded developmental projects in these neighbouring countries are often proving to be debt-traps in which these countries are ﬁnding themselves ensnared, which is why, several projects are now being cancelled or their terms are being re-negotiated. Many of these countries have also intensiﬁed their political relations and defence ties with countries like the USA, India, Japan, Australia and France who too have publicly criticised China for its ‘excesses’ in several sectors. These countries can maintain the balance of power in the region. Therefore, how China can use its excellent economic linkages with the region to build political trust will determine, to a great extent, the future trajectory of its rise. Not least, it shall also determine how peacefully China can achieve its objective of becoming a global leader in terms of national strength and international inﬂuence.

14 CHINA’S GEOECONOMIC MANOEUVRINGS IN SOUTHEAST … 255 References Ao, T. 2019. Southeast Asia in the ongoing belt and road initiative. Indian Council of World Affairs. https://www.icwa.in/show_content.php?lang+1& level=3&ls_id=4797&lid=2818. Chakraborti, T., and Bhattacharya, S. 2012. South China sea imbroglio: Prob- lems, outcome and India’s stand. The Institute of Foreign Policy Studies. The University of Calcutta. Policy Brief. No.5. Chaturvedy, R. R. 2017. The 21st century maritime silk road. Observer Research Foundation Brief . https://www.orfonline.org/research/the-21st- century-maritime-silk-road/. China has fully militarized three islands in South China Sea, US admiral says. 2022. The Guardian. https://amp.theguardian.com/world/2022/mar/21/ china-has-fully-militarized-three-islands-in-south-china-sea-us-aadmiral-says. Davidson, H. 2021. China owned $385 billion including ‘hidden debt’ from poorer nations, says report. The Guardian. https://amp.theguardian.com/ world/2021/sep/30/42-nations-owe-china-hidden-debts-exceeding-10-of- gdp-says-report. Eyler, B. 2020. Science shows Chinese dams are devastating the Mekong. Foreign Policy. https://foreignpolicy.com/2020/04/22/science-shows-chi nese-dams-devastating-mekong-river/. Freeman, N. 2019. Can Laos proﬁt from China rail link despite being US$1.5 billion in debt? South China Morning Post. https://www.scmp.com/week- asia/opinion/article/304/394/can-laos-proﬁt-from-china-rail-link-despite- being-us15-billion-debt. Goh, E. and Nan, L. 2021. Chinese investment in Southeast Asia, 2005–2019: Patterns and signiﬁcance. Australian National University Policy Brieﬁng- SEARBO. https://www.newmandala.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/08/ Gohliu_SEARBO2_Chinese-investment-in-Southeast-Asia-2005-20192.pdf. Guerreiro, P . 2021. What Chinese Dams in Laos Tell Us About the Belt and road initiative. The Diplomat. https://thediplomat.com/2021/12/what-chi nese-dams-in-laos-tell-us-abot-the-belt-and-road-initiative/. In Search of Social Justice along the Myanmar-China Oil and Gas Pipeline. 2015. Myanmar-China Pipeline Watch Committee. https://www.business-humanr ights.org/documents/6749/Follow-up_Report_English_14092017.pdf. Ismail, G. and Camba, A. 2022. China’s BRI is aggravating ethnic tensions in the global South. The Diplomat. https://www.thediplomat.com/2022/05/ chinas-bri-is-aggravating-ethnic-tensions-in-the-global-south/. Jaknanihan, A. 2022. What China gets wrong about Southeast Asia. The Diplomat. https://thediplomat.com/2022/06/what-china-gets-wrong- about-southeast-asia/. Kondapalli, S. 2008. Changing security paradigm in China. World Focus.

256 T. MUKHERJEE Kurlantzick, J. 2006. China’s charm offensive in Southeast Asia. Current History. https://carnegieendowment.org/ﬁles/Kurlantzick_SoutheastAsia_China.pdf. Parameswaran, P . 2017. China plays up ASEAN Confucius institute presence with Laos project. The Diplomat. https://www.thediplomat.com/2017/10/ china-plays-up-asean-confucius-institute-presence-with-laos-project/). Philippines reports ‘confrontation’ with China in South China Sea. 2023. Al Jazeera. https://www.aljazeera.com/amp/news/2023/4/28/philippines-rep orts-confrontation-with-hina-in-south-china-sea. Preston, R. 2022. Philippines to reconsider Chinese ﬁnance for rail projects. International Railway Journal. Philippines. https://www.railjournal.com/ﬁn ancial/philippines-to-reconsider-chinese-ﬁnance-for-rail-projects/. Puri, R. and Sehgal, A. 2011. The South China Sea Dispute: Implications for India. Indian Foreign Affairs Journal, 6(4). Southeast Asia withheld China’s Attempts to Economically Breach Sovereignty. 2022. Business Standard. https://wap.business-standard.com/article-amp/ international/southeast-asia-withheld-china-s-attempts-to-economically-bre ach-sovereignty-122/22700721_1.html. Thayer, C. A. 2010. Vietnam and rising China: The structural dynamics of Mature Asymmetry. Southeast Asian Affairs, 401–404. The Economic Times. 2018, August 27. The state of Southeast Asia: 2022 survey report. 2022. ISEAS-YusofIshak Institute. https://www.iseas.edu.sg/ articles-commentaries/state-of-southeast-asia-survey/the-state-of-southeast- asia-2022-survey-report/. Trinh,V. D. and Hui, H.D. 2023. Vietnam hedges its bets on the BRI. East Asia Forum. https://www.eastasiaforum.org/2023/03/15/vietnam-hedges- its-bets-on-the-bri/. Vision and Actions on Jointly Building Silk Road Economic Belt and 21st Century Maritime Silk Road. 2015. National development and reform commission. Ministry of Foreign Affairs. People’s Republic of China. https:// en.ndrc.gov.in/newsrelease/201503/t20150330_669367.html. Youyi, H. 2011. Context, not history, matters for Deng’s famous phrase. Global Times. https://www.globaltimes.cn/content/661734.shtml. Xinhua. 2017. Full text of Xi Jinping’s report at 19th CPC national congress. http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/special/2017-11/03/C-136725942. html.

CHAPTER 15 Neoliberalism, Geoeconomics and the Chinese Reality: The BRI Experience in Southeast Asia Ishani Naskar The world is a fast-changing one, albeit complex. From the second half of the past century, neoliberal economics and accompanying political values have largely underscored international politics. However, into 1920s, it is very evident that the neoliberal order has undergone considerable changes, putting to question the supremacy of the US-led global order. A recent work traces the rise and fall of the neoliberal order that has led to the attrition of the American Dream and the Washington Consensus (Gerstle 2022). The ﬁnancial recession in 2008 seemed to have laid bare the inﬁrmities of the open economy. It justiﬁed the need for the return of nationalistic fervour and populism both at the domestic and interna- tional levels. The seemingly quixotic decisions of the Trump presidency to dissociate from the Trans-Paciﬁc Partnership can be contextualised thus. I. Naskar (B) Jadavpur University, Kolkata, India e-mail: akiksha@gmail.com © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapor e Pte Ltd. 2024 O. Mishra and S. Sen (eds.), Global Political Economy, Geopolitics and International Security , https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-97-2231-0_15 257

258 I. NASKAR A notable aspect of the contemporary liberal and neoliberal order is the rising signiﬁcance of regionalism. Regionalism developed in the Cold War period, but what remains noteworthy is that it is still devoid of any universal formatting, template or attributes. The evolution of regionalism ought to be contextualised in the fact that in the recent international relations, globalisation can be dissociated from the dominance of the US. There are now plural world views of neoliberal economy and order. For instance, there has been an attempt to create a pan-Asian economic space in Asia. Two trends underpin this observation. First is the growing salience of the mega trade pacts that have become symptomatic of the failure of the Doha Rounds of global trade negotiations—the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) is an example thereof. The second trend is the remarkable transition of the Chinese economy enabling it to act as the binding force that has boosted inter-regional trade and strengthened the East Asian regional architecture. Whereas ASEAN occupies the driver’s seat as the primary regional mechanism, albeit rooted in Southeast Asia, two other pan-Asian regional mechanisms have become integral to the regional dynamics of the region—the ASEAN Plus Three grouping and the East Asian Summit. This in turn is supplemented by the currency swap arrangement of the region—the Chiang Mai Initiative and the Asian Bond Initiative, with the Asian Bond Market taking care of the domestic and regional bond interdependencies (Ravenhill 2010). Some scholars have described this as East Asian Regionalism but this also has been described as the New Asian Regionalism. An expert argues that the New Asian Regionalism is witness to the steady ﬂow of global investments attracting the interests of govern- ments and business communities; this has been made possible for two reasons. First, the hub of economic activity has shifted from the West to Asia energising the commercial vibrancy of the region. Second, Asia is on a path of integration riding a ten-fold increase in Free Trade Agreements (FTAs) (Hsieh 2021). The ASEAN-led mechanisms involve economies of the Asia–Paciﬁc creating a larger legal framework that underlines the New Asian Regionalism. This in turn is strengthening the New Regional Economic Order (NREO), set to underline the new multi-polar economic order. This new ordering will see a rise in the scope of South-South Cooperation and the challenge to both the Washington Consensus and the Brussels Effect. The Chinese have proposed an alternative in the form of the Beijing Consensus that rejects the Western standards of GDP and per capita income as important markers for understanding economic

15 NEOLIBERALISM, GEOECONOMICS AND THE CHINESE … 259 growth. However, the Beijing Consensus has its own set of challenges in terms of acceptability and the larger question of Chinese geopolitical manoeuvrings vis-à-vis the international order. Therefore, the pivot of the new emerging economic multilateralism is ASEAN and the ASEAN plus mechanisms. The ASEAN Consensus as it is now being called is best suited for the geoeconomics of the region. It attempts to maintain both equidistance and ﬁne balance between the Washington Consensus and the Beijing Consensus; however, the geopol- itics of the region is dominated by the US narrative of the Indo-Paciﬁc. As a region, Southeast Asia is an example of collective bargaining of the Asian powers. However, China is not a part of the ASEAN ingenuity because China has its own geoeconomic and geopolitical objectives that are not essentially in sync with that of this neighbourhood. In fact, the focus of the rest of the discussion is to highlight how China’s Belt and Road Initiative has found an easy way into the sub-regional frameworks of the ASEAN region. The chapter argues that China is free-riding the process of integration of the region, especially in terms of connectivity and furthering the objectives of the BRI. We shall also try to read into the nature of the BRI, looking at it from a non-western perspective and see whether China’s forays into Southeast Asia is an example of how actually geoeconomics can help attain geopolitical goals, or, whether geopolitics is a priority in its own rights. The rest of the discussion shall be divided into three parts. The next section will look at the sub-regional framework in the ASEAN region—the Greater Mekong Sub-region. The following section will see how the BRI has found its way into the GMS region by providing support to the infrastructural activities of the region apart from trade linkages. The ﬁnal section will be an analysis of how the BRI is building up an alternative narrative of regionalism akin to the Asian context. The concluding section will try to argue how the BRI is a story of the interplay between geoeconomics and geopolitics. T he Greater Mekong Sub-Region- - -Steps Towards Partnership In the early 1990s, the countries around the Mekong Basin were plagued by several challenges that ranged from poor economic growth to conﬂicts and ethnic issues and painful histories. The countries include Laos, Cambodia, Vietnam, Myanmar, Thailand and the two Chinese provinces of Yunnan and Guangxi. Further, the region was the least connected in

260 I. NASKAR terms of physical connectivity making the possibility of any kind of inte- gration bleak at that point in time. In 1992, for the ﬁrst time, the ofﬁcial representatives of the Mekong region met in Manila at a meeting organ- ised by the then director general of the Asian Development Bank (ADB). The meeting was a stepping stone for establishing physical connectivity, encouraging a free ﬂow of both goods and people across the borders of these countries, and improving trade competitiveness. The idea was to address the issue of peace through economic development and recover the war-torn systems of Indo-China. That was made possible by the changing nature of the economies of the region—China, Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia. Morita recalled this ﬁrst meeting, “When we ﬁrst met, we did not even have a name for the group. This was discussed only in a subsequent meeting when it was decided to call it the Greater Mekong Sub-region.” He further describes, “We focused on our common values of modesty, spirit of cooperation, kindness and avoidance of conﬂict” (Morita 2012:4 ) . Pivotal to the GMS are the ‘economic corridors’ that were proposed at the Eighth Ministerial Meeting of the GMS in 1998. In the subse- quent economic ministerial meeting in 2000, three economic corridors were designated. . The East–West Economic Corridor (EWEC) runs from Vietnam to Myanmar. It is the only direct and continuous land route across mainland Southeast Asia. . The North–South Economic Corridor (NSEC) runs from southern China to the ports of Southeast Asia—there are three sub- corridors—Kunming–Bangkok via the Lao PDR or Myanmar; Kunming–Ha Noi–Hai Phong; and Nanning–Ha Noi. It is almost complete. . the Southern Economic Corridor (SEC) spans from Vietnam to Myanmar but at the lower latitudes. The corridor runs through southern Thailand, Cambodia, and southern Vietnam and includes the Phnom Penh–Ho Chi Minh City Highway Project. Yet, some parts of the corridors are still to be completed; for instance, the section from Bangkok to Dawei in Myanmar, newly added as a part of the SEC, is still unpaved. Or, the border between Meng La in Myanmar and Daluo in Yunnan along the NSEC does not allow passing by people of

15 NEOLIBERALISM, GEOECONOMICS AND THE CHINESE … 261 the third countries (Ishida 2019: 186). Apart from these corridors, trans- port projects include upgradation of the inland water navigation, seaports and railway network(s). There are plans to upgrade the two-lane roads to four-lane roads and, subsequently expressways. Improvements in connectivity have gone a long way to reduce the cost of transportation, reduced travel times and costs and are effec- tive in enhancing the potential of trade throughout the region. The economic corridors are helping in boosting trade and overall development converting towns and settlements in trading hubs (Asian Development Bank 2023). The sectors of cooperation that have been identiﬁed by GMS are— agriculture, energy, environment, human resource development, telecom- munication, tourism, trade and investment and transport. Into the third decade, the GMS strategy indicates a quantum shift in multisectoral investments—targeting urban and rural integrated development along the corridors mentioned above. It requires institutional reforms towards better transport and trade facilitation, power generation and agreements, focus on sustainable development and management of the environment. Most important the strategy is to promote the GMS as an integrated tourist destination that could ensure improved use of human resources (Hsieh 2021: 6–7). Thus, the ASEAN Mekong Basin Development Cooperation (AMBDC) is important in this context. The AMBDC is not only an economic framework for cooperation but also has a railway connectivity project amongst which the Singapore—Kunming Project is a ﬂagship project. The Project was proposed at the Fifth ASEAN Summit in December 2015. The Singapore-Kunming Rail Link (SKRL) was devel- oped to connect several ASEAN countries and China. It is being projected as a pan-Asian rail link(s) that includes three main routes from Kunming, China, to Bangkok, Thailand. The eastern link will be established through Vietnam and Cambodia, the central line will be laid through Laos and the western linkage is planned to pass through Myanmar (SKRL 2023). The railway link is one of the critical components of the Master Plan on ASEAN Connectivity, yet the progress is really slow because the orig- inal plan was to complete this mega project way back in 2015. There are many missing links in train connectivity (Chankosal 2013: 11). However, the major reason for the inability to complete the project is the cost of

262 I. NASKAR this project which was put at more than a billion dollars. 1 While the story of AMBDC is yet to ﬂourish, there are underlying cross-currents between Vietnam and Thailand over inﬂuence in the Indo-China region and vying for China’s attention (Yoshimatsu 2010: 7–11; Narine 2002). One can see Thailand projecting its Ayeyawady-Chao Phraya-Mekong Economic Cooperation Strategy (ACMECS) 2 against Vietnam’s East–West Corridor and CLV Triangle Development (Vietnam Investment Review June 17, 2019). On the other hand, Malaysia has always been supporting the AMBDC. In the meanwhile, it was realised that China has started to make forays into the region. However, before discussing how China’s BRI has made inroads into this region, the following section will be a concise discussion of the Belt and Road Initiative. Belt and Road Initiative: A ‘Policy Envelope’ One should begin with the understanding that for the Chinese Commu- nist Party, history and heritage is a huge repository of political capital that the leadership (across generations) has been drawing from to legit- imise policies. Under Xi Jinping, the idea is rejuvenated under the larger rubric of spiritual rejuvenation of the Chinese nation (Wang 2021). His recent urge to advance the study of Chinese civilisation to strengthen the cultural conﬁdence of the country is important (Global Times May 28, 2022). Placed in this context, one can recollect that under the Han Dynasty (C. 206–220 BCE) trade routes were established, mostly conti- nental that reached to Central Asia and West Asia and conducted trade 1 Under the AMBDC, ﬁfty-ﬁve projects were organised by 2005, covering a number of sectors including infrastructure, trade and investment, industry, minerals, agriculture, forestry and tourism. Of these projects, thirty-one secured funding while the remaining twenty-four required roughly $87.5 million of funding support. Therefore, the major cause of this slow progress is the lack of sufﬁcient ﬁnancial resources, particularly after the Asian ﬁnancial crisis in 1997–1998. For details see ASEAN Annual Report 2005–2006: ASEAN at the Centre, Jakarta, ASEAN Secretariat, July 2006,p .2 7 . 2 The Ayeyawady-Chao Phraya-Mekong Economic Collaboration Strategy, or ACMECS, is a framework for collaboration between Cambodia, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Myanmar, Thailand, and Vietnam that intends to leverage member countries’ distinct assets and promote balanced development in the subregion. Thailand’s Prime Minister Thaksin- Shinawatra initiated the establishment of this framework of cooperation in April 2003. Transportation, as well as trade and investment facilitation, are examples of collaborative sectors.

15 NEOLIBERALISM, GEOECONOMICS AND THE CHINESE … 263 with the Ottoman Empire until it was shut down in 1453. In 2013, Pres- ident Xi Jinping declared China’s regional policies. He referred to the ancient trade and cultural contacts between China and countries around; he was only connecting the dots drawing from historical capital. The two routes thus mentioned, the ‘21st Century Maritime Silk Road’ initiative and its complementary Silk Road were only about resuscitating century- old contact that the Middle Kingdom had with Asia and Europe. The whole initiative is brought under the single framework of One Belt One Road (OBOR). One of the discourses on the OBOR is that it projects the image of China as a civilisational power that draws heavily from its history of imperial (and not imperialist) relations with the neighbourhood both far and near. In his 2017 speech, President Xi Jinping made exten- sive reference to the historical roots of and civilisational links of the BRI (Xinhua May 16, 2017). Building on this discourse, Chinese reconnect is not driven only towards its particularistic advantage but driven more for the larger beneﬁt of all those who join the BRI, which ﬁnds expression in ‘win–win cooperation’. There is no clear-cut ofﬁcial deﬁnition of the BRI. The closest to that can be found in the document ‘Visions and Actions on Jointly Building Silk Road Economic Belt and the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road’ jointly published by the National Development Reform Commis- sion, Ministry of External Affairs and the Ministry of Commerce with due permission from the State Council of the People’s Republic of China. The route map of connectivity was thus laid as: The Belt and Road runs through the continents of Asia, Europe and Africa, connecting the vibrant East Asia economic circle at one end and the devel- oped European economic circle at the other, and encompassing countries with huge potential for economic development. The Silk Road Economic Belt focuses on bringing together China, Central Asia, Russia and Europe (the Baltic); linking China with the Persian Gulf and the Mediterranean Sea through Central Asia and West Asia; and connecting China with Southeast Asia, South Asia and the Indian Ocean. The 21st-Century Maritime Silk Road is designed to go from China’s coast to Europe through the South China Sea and the Indian Ocean in one route, and from China’s coast through the South China Sea to the South Paciﬁc in the other (National Development Reform Commission March 28, 2015). It further mentions that,

264 I. NASKAR On land, the Initiative will focus on jointly building a new Eurasian Land Bridge and developing China-Mongolia-Russia, China-Central Asia-West Asia and China-Indochina Peninsula economic corridors by taking advan- tage of international transport routes, relying on core cities along the Belt and Road and using key economic industrial parks as cooperation plat- forms. At sea, the Initiative will focus on jointly building smooth, secure and efﬁcient transport routes connecting major sea ports along the Belt and Road. The China-Pakistan Economic Corridor and the Bangladesh- China-India-Myanmar Economic Corridor are closely related to the Belt and Road Initiative and therefore require closer cooperation and greater progress (National Development Reform Commission March 28, 2015). It is noteworthy that, although the BRI seeks to connect well beyond the immediate neighbourhood into Africa, its primary scope of connec- tivity is the neighbourhood and Europe, i.e. Eurasia and East Asia. To put it in a nutshell, the BRI has ﬁve geographical regions—Southeast Asia, South Asia, Central Asia, West Asia, Central and East Europe. This is supplemented by the Maritime Silk Route (MSR) that links, East Asia and the Chinese coast through the South China Sea, Indian Ocean and the Bay of Bengal to Southeast Asia and South Asia, and further to West Asia and Europe through the Persian Gulf and Mediterranean Sea (Palit 2017). The MSR is a single channel of connectivity linking China with East Asia, South and Southeast Asia and West Asia (Garlick 2020: 10). Likewise, it has been observed that the maritime arm of the BRI is bolstering economic inter-connectivity between China and the maritime states of Southeast Asia, South Asia and the Middle East (Clarke 2018: 91). However, one must make a mental note of the fact that regions as ‘constructs’ are largely associated with the Western discourse; they are underpinned by geoeconomic and geopolitical interests. China’s BRI therefore need not and does not follow the same regional constructs. As an example, one can read Qian’s work which gives the impression that BRI treats Pakistan within the larger framework of West Asia and is singled ‘out of’ the South Asian framework. According to him, ‘the proposal of the Belt and Road’ initiative, construction of the ‘Pakistan energy corridor’ and the ‘Gulf Pearl Chain’ will cover the Arabian Penin- sula, and in turn, promote the joint-building of ‘the Belt and Road’ (Qian 2016: 28). There is thus a deliberate geographical ambiguity as one of the deﬁning features of the BRI. Moreover, BRI is evolving through newer dimensions; there is already a BRI 2.0 in the ofﬁng. Thus,

15 NEOLIBERALISM, GEOECONOMICS AND THE CHINESE … 265 it is not only about geographical imprecision but also about modula- tions and modiﬁcations in the policy approach of the BRI. Therefore, one can conceive of the BRI as a ‘policy envelope’ (Garlick 2019:4 ; Zen 2019), that can ‘ﬁt in’ as well as ‘keep out’ according to evolving demands or situations or both. However, contemporary critical literature gives an idea of how BRI’s policy envelope feature allows for a plurality of interpretations to the extent that it can cause tensions within various domestic constituencies for resources and power (Jones and Zen 2019: 1415–1439). Yet, as far as China’s regional engagements and activities are concerned, the BRI has also become one of the main channels and avenues for Chinese organisations and associations to promote trade and business. An example could be the China and the Central and East Euro- pean 17 + 1 Forum. This mechanism which began in 2012 was designed to promote business and trade relations with the countries of the region. 3 Similarly, for the Arab states, there is the China-Arab States Cooperation Forum that will facilitate the cooperation between China and the Arab countries. The Arab Policy Paper published in 2016 envisions the kind of relationship China is seeking with the region, which is supplemented by Xi’s proposal for a 1 + 2 + 3 pattern of cooperation (Shiwei 2022). China’s relations with the Central Asian countries have been institu- tionalised through the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO) since its formation back in 2000. The SCO is a forum that provides China with the scope to develop a regional framework involving critical neighbours of Central Asia, Russia and India according to the Chinese conception of regional engagement. In addition, in 2022, China’s energy-rich province of Shandong hosted the First China-Central Asia Industrial and Invest- ment Cooperation Forum. Zhu Yongbiao, executive director of Lanzhou University’s Belt and Road Research Centre, made the observation that the forum is another building block for the BRI. He opines that “[F]rom a practical perspective, the forum will promote cooperation between China and the ﬁve Central Asian countries in energy, food, climate change 3 In 2021 Lithuania followed by Latvia and Estonia left the CEE 17 + 1 Forum making in 16 + 1. Again in 2023 in context of China’s support to Ukraine, the Czech Republic declared that they are no longer ‘an active member’ of the mechanism. See, Start Lau, “China’s club for talking to Czechs is dead Czechs say”, Politico, May 4, 2023, available at, https://www.politico.eu/article/czech-slam-china-xi-jinping-pointless-club-for-central- europe/.

266 I. NASKAR and other areas under the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI)” (Mingyang and Cong 2023). In South Asia, however, China has not been able to bring up either any equivalent of SCO or any alternative to the regional organisation of the region—SAARC. Instead, China has taken a more customised approach with the individual countries ﬂooding them with funds and building infrastructure such as the CPEC in Pakistan, the Hambantota Port Project in Sri Lanka, the Podda Setu in Bangladesh, dam construc- tions and Pokhara Airport in Nepal and the expansion of Velena Airport and Sinamale Bridge in Maldives. A Carnegie Foundation Research paper mentions that during the pandemic, China made diplomatic inroads through medical assistance by providing badly needed medical equip- ment, biomedical expertise, and funds to deal with the coronavirus (Pal 2021). During COVID times China created more functional initiatives like the South Asian COVID Initiative. Research in the post-COVID period reveals that China has used the pandemic as an opportunity to make further forays into South Asia—like Bangladesh, Nepal, Sri Lanka, and Pakistan. 4 In the post-COVID period, these countries have seen a rise in tourism with a rise in footfalls of the tourists from China. This has helped the countries to recharge their sliding economy to a certain extent. Besides, there is a rise in the number of Confucius Institutes that have been established in these countries; alongside, scholars and students are given full scholarship offers from China, and a section of the local media, both print and digital actively promote the BRI in their respective coun- tries (Attanayake and Haiqi, 2021). To put all this in perspective, in South Asia, China’s BRI has manifested in the form of bilateral mollycoddling, targeting vulnerable economies and free-riding the individual insecurities some countries of the region have vis-à-vis India. The presence of India in 4 Since 2020 initiated and China continued virtual dialogues with South Asian countries focusing on strengthening cooperation in ﬁghting the COVID-19 pandemic. Proposals were made to extend the CPEC to Afghanistan and China also place a proposal to build the Trans-Himalayan Economic Corridor with Nepal jointly. China also made a proposal to organise a China-South Asia E-commerce Cooperation Forum on Poverty Alleviation in Rural Areas. Important to note that the participants agreed to continue their cooperation through regular communication and consultations. For more, read Chulanee Attanayake and Zheng Haiqi, “China’s Pandemic Diplomacy in South Asia”, ISAS Insights, June 15, 2021, available online at https://www.isas.nus.edu.sg/papers/chinas-pandemic- diplomacy-in-south-asia/.

15 NEOLIBERALISM, GEOECONOMICS AND THE CHINESE … 267 South Asia will prevent China from either designing or instrumentalising any regional grouping to enmesh with the broader scope of the BRI. Compared to South Asia, China has made a noticeable foray into Southeast Asia with a special focus on the GMS region. For instance, “The AMBDC’s ﬂagship project Singapore-Kunming Rail Link (SKRL) made little headway and headline for two decades until China made a splash in recent years with several high-speed train projects under its Belt and Road Initiative (BRI)” (Ha and Seth 2021: 3). The National Develop- ment and Reform Commission, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of China, and the Ministry of Commerce of the People’s Republic of China issued the ‘Vision and Actions on Jointly Building the Silk Road Economic Belt and the 21st-Century Maritime Silk Road’ in 2015, with the authorisa- tion of the State Council. It underlined the importance of focusing on the China-Indo-China Peninsula Economic Corridors by utilising inter- national transportation networks, depending on core cities along the Belt and Road, and employing signiﬁcant economic industrial parks as cooper- ation platforms (National Development and Reform Commission 2015). Thus, the mandate of the BRI is to penetrate the economic corridors and connectivity of the GMS region. Two points are important here in the concluding part of this section. First, China is aware of the fact that many of the infrastructural projects that China has been investing in under the BRI are white elephants that will be giving little or no value to the recipients and will burn a hole in China’s pockets. The shape of the projects has also changed over time as ground realities and circumstances have changed especially after the pandemic. The much-hyped China-Pakistan Economic Corridor is an ideal example. To begin with, the experts and decision-makers who originally laid the blueprint of the CPEC were quite aware of the tech- nical difﬁculties and unfeasibility of the project. Thus, modiﬁcations of the original plan went to the extent that it almost resembled no corridor as was originally conceived (Small 2020: 20). Subsequently, in the post- COVID period, with changing strategic conﬁgurations both at the global and regional levels, with Pakistan’s domestic woes and its shrinking strategic leverage, with the emerging complications of the Sino-Pakistan relationship and with China’s economic challenges, its pitching for CPEC has changed. Now it has become more modest. 5 5 Even under BRI 2.0 CPEC’s position is not very bright. A look into the ofﬁcial website of the CPEC from the Pakistani side will show that until now only four projects

268 I. NASKAR Not only in the case of CPEC, various issues and accompanying controversies have emerged with other projects of the BRI in different parts of the world—Asia and Africa in particular questioning the viability, and sustainability of the BRI projects both from the donor’s and recipi- ent’s ends. 6 Yet the BRI is set to continue and a major rationale behind it is the geopolitical dividends it will fetch for China. But this is not new; in this context, one is reminded of Chinese President Jiang Zemin’s response to the criticism against the proposed Tibet Qinghai railway in 2001 (New York Times 2001). It is further understood that mega projects like the BRI are not about mere materialistic, economic goalposts, but a larger goal of normative intent that can project China as a potential global leader. This takes us to the second point. The BRI underscores China’s attempt at creating an ideational backdrop for the implementation and success of the project itself. This is more important in the context of the growing perception that China actually would not be able to deliver international public goods that are expected of it in case China wishes to provide alternative leadership to the West, particularly the US. One such argument is the Kindleberger Trap that projects China as a weak power rather than a strong contender to the US in assuming international responsibility. 7 As a counterargument, the BRI narrative speaks about under the CPEC have been completed. Only one project above the value of US$ 100 million has been completed and only one worth over $300 million has been completed around the Gwadar Port. Thus, out of the 14 proposed projects, the rest 10 are still to be completed. See, the project status update in the ofﬁcial website of the CPEC Secretariat under the Ministry of Ministry, Development and Planning Initiatives at https://cpec. gov.pk/gwadar, accessed on 02.10.2023. Also read, Lt. General K.J. Singh, “Why Beijing hit the reset on BRI and CPEC”, Opinion, Times of India, October 30, 2020, online version available at, https://timesoﬁndia.indiatimes.com/blogs/generals-jottings/why-bei jing-hit-the-reset-on-bri-cpec/. 6 For a concise understanding of the challenges of BRI-related projects read, Ritika Passi, “The BRI: A White Elephant in the Making?” in Harsh V. Pant and Premesha Saha (ed). Mapping the Belt and Road Initiative: Reach, Implications and Consequences, Observer Research Foundation, New Delhi, 2021. Also read, Kemel Toktomushev, “The Belt and Road Initiative: The March of White Elephants?”,China-US Focus, February 22, 2019, available at, https://www.chinausfocus.com/ﬁnance-economy/the-belt-and-road- initiative-the-march-of-white-elephants. 7 There are four traps indicated that China is afraid of falling into, including the Kindle- berger Trap, as applied by Joesph Nye Jr. and derived from historian Charles Kindleberger. For further information on the Kindleberger trap, check Joseph Nye Jr.’s Soft Power and Great-Power Competition, Shifting Sands in the Balance of Power Between the United States

15 NEOLIBERALISM, GEOECONOMICS AND THE CHINESE … 269 development and win–win cooperation and also the Beijing Consensus that tries to convince its members (149 in number) that China’s rise is beneﬁcial to each of the members and the international order in general. Xi Jinping’s proposal of an alternative form of international relations, his master narrative of the ‘China Dream’ of being resurrected to the global centre stage ﬁnds expression in the BRI. Materialistically this ﬁnds expres- sion in China’s grand display of its engineering prowess and ability to establish economic outposts worldwide, undertake major overseas infras- tructural projects, make huge energy investments and provide credit lines. When this is read in conjunction with the Chinese role in BRICS and the New Development Bank, it makes sense that the BRI also seeks to create an alternative reading of regional ordering. T he BRI and an Alternative Expression of Regionalism Before discussing the BRI as an alternative expression of regionalism, there is a need to understand how regionalism has become a critical component of Chinese foreign policy. The argument here is that China has developed its own comprehensive sense of security that understands the symbiotic relationship between economic development and security (Freeman 2018: 82). Thus, China believes that regional economic devel- opment is a way of achieving comprehensive security. Economic uplift of the larger neighbourhood could ensure security that would in turn assure China of fewer domestic threats, and less disturbed borders. It is a well- known fact that China faces domestic threats in Xinjiang. China believes that by promoting its own version of comprehensive security, Chinese foreign policy would be in a position to address both domestic challenges and quell adverse dynamics that threaten its neighbourhood. There is a background to this. Right from the time of President Hu Jintao, China had underlined the principles of ‘peace, development and cooperation’ that directed Chinese participation in multilateral institutions like the UN and also encouraged positive bilateral relations with individual coun- tries. Further, Jintao’s proposal of a ‘harmonious world order’ bore the message that China would remain mindful of the interests of other nations and China, Springer, 2023, pp.161–165. For the four types of debt traps read, Yanzhong Huang, “The Four Traps China May Fall Into”, Council on Foreign Relations, October 30, 2017, available at, https://www.cfr.org/blog/four-traps-china-may-fall.

270 I. NASKAR and would interpret foreign policy in a non-military, non-combative way (Mederois 2009: 45–60). At present, Xi Jinping, in his idea of ‘Compre- hensive National Security’, has underlined the need to diversify Chinese foreign policy towards economic, technological and geopolitical leader- ship. Therefore, contemporary Chinese foreign policy is looking forward to delivering public goods and harnessing the potential of the regional mechanisms of the region. Now when one looks at Southeast Asian regionalism like the ASEAN and sub-regional frameworks like the GMS, an interesting plethora of literature connects regionalism with a state’s foreign policy to achieve security in a larger sense, towards comprehensive security. Since the Asian economic meltdown, states have resorted to multilateral mechanisms to promote the idea of comprehensive security, which needs both collective will and collective responsibility. At the foreign policy level, it’s an attempt on their part to address economic insecurities that they cannot address individually. Thus, multilateralism in this part of the world has ensured what Pempel described as ‘institutional buffering’ against global ﬁnan- cial distress and its impacts. It explains to a certain extent why there has been a surge in multilateralism in this region (Pempel 2010: 209–238). At this point, one could try to juxtapose (or connect) the Southeast Asian idea of comprehensive security with the Chinese one. China’s interest in comprehensive security that proposes collective economic development underscores Chinese FTA with ASEAN or master connectivity plans in the GMS region. Therefore, both China and the countries of Southeast Asia share a common approach in promoting regionalism and regional engagement as a part of their foreign policy. For China, connecting with regionalism is both an economic and strategic goal that is facilitated through the BRI. Perhaps no single theoretical approach is adequate to explain how BRI takes regionalism as a part of its policy. It implies two things. First, it implies, that in promoting an alternative normative ordering, the BRI necessitates a different approach to regionalism. In this context, Kavalski has explained elaborately how the Chinese understanding of norms is based on relationships and not on uniformity or appropriateness (Kavalski 2023: 247–267). This takes us to the second implication—the Chinese approach to regionalism encourages the idea of ‘co-constitution’ or ‘mutualisation’ of practices, values and norms (Garlik 2020:9 ) . I n this manner, the ultimate objective of this normative mandate of the BRI is to persuade member countries of the region to appreciate the

15 NEOLIBERALISM, GEOECONOMICS AND THE CHINESE … 271 Chinese approach towards regionalism. This would allow Southeast Asian countries to accept the Chinese infrastructural and economic forays into the region. Thus, terms like ‘win–win cooperation’ were one amongst the lexicon that would underscore the Chinese materialistic approach to regionalism as much as BRI’s ideational foray into Southeast Asia. Conclusion At a discursive level, the dominant understanding of the BRI in South- east Asia is an interface between geoeconomics and geopolitics. As Small ( 2020: 9) observed, BRI projects are impossible to dissociate from geopo- litical dividends. Wigell makes a strong case for the growing importance of geoeconomics over geopolitics, and how regional powers are using economic policies as a tool of their foreign policy to achieve strategic goals. He underlines that geoeconomic calculations are a serious compo- nent of regional powers’ geo-strategy and identiﬁes China as one of those regional powers (others being Brazil, Germany, India, Japan, Russia, and South Africa). He further identiﬁes four manifestations of these geoe- conomic strategies—neo-imperialism, neo-mercantilism, hegemony, and liberal institutionalism (Wigell 2016: 135–151). Herein many may differ about China’s regional status, but it is better to think of China as a rising regional power with geoeconomic strategies that impact its regional neighbourhood and then beyond. China is an aspiring global power but not a global one. In terms of its military prowess, it is still behind the United States. However, it is in the economic domain that China is creating the global space for itself. In this context, the work by Bethany Allen throws light on how China has weaponised its economic poli- cies and activities to gradually change the shape of the world order in the future. She has argued how China is systematically using its compa- nies and businesses to neutralise competitors and threats—both economic and political (Allen, 2023). China does not believe in the neo-liberal ordering propagated by the West that also promotes liberal values. In this context, the way China’s BRI is designing an alternative form of economic integration with the neighbouring areas of the GMS sub-region, it is symptomatic of a new avatar of neo-liberal economics. One can also argue that China’s BRI-led projects in the GMS region indicate the triumph of Chinese geoeconomics free-riding the neo-liberal idea of economic integration. Time will tell what shape it takes in the future.

272 I. NASKAR References Freeman, C.P . 2018. China’s regionalism foreign policy and China-India relations in South Asia. Contemporary Politics 24 (1): 81–97. Central Vietnam Emerges as World’s Gateway to ASEAN. 2019, June 17.Vietnam investment review, a special edition of Bao Dao Tu. https://vir. com.vn/central-vietnam-emerges-as-worlds-gateway-to-asean-68547.html. In Jiang’s Words: ‘I Hope the Western World Can Understand China Better’. 2001, August 9. New Y ork Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2001/08/09/ international/asia/in-jiangs-words-i-hope-the-western-world-can-understand. html. Allen, B. 2023. Beijing Rules. China’s Quest for Global Inﬂuence: John Murray. ASEAN Secretariat. 2006, July. ASEAN annual report 2005–2006: ASEAN at the centre, Jakarta. Asian Regional Centre. n.d. https://aric.adb.org/initiative/ayeyawady-chao-phr aya-mekong-economic-cooperation-strategy. Accessed on 26.04.2023. Chankosal, T. 2013, February. The case study on the Singapore-Kunming Railway. ASEAN Intelligence Report. Clarke, M. 2018. The belt and road initiative: Exploring Beijing’s motivations and challenges for its new silk road. Strategic Analysis 42 (2): 84–102. Completion Report, lao people’s democratic republic: greater Mekong Subre- gioneast–West economic corridor towns development project, Project Number: 43319–022. 2023. Asian Development Bank. https://www.adb. org/sites/default/ﬁles/project-documents/43319/43319-022-pcr-en_7.pdf. Garlick, J. 2019. The regional impacts of China’s belt and road initiative. Journal of Current Chinese Affairs 49 (1): 3–13. Garlick, J. 2020. The role of belt and road initiative in China’s international relations. In The Impact of China’s Belt and Road Initiative: From Asia to Europe. Routledge. Gerstle, G. 2022.The rise and fall of the neoliberal order: America and the world i n t h ef r e em a r k e re r a. Oxford University Press. Global Times. 2022, May 28. https://www.globaltimes.cn/page/202205/126 6757.shtml. Haiqi, Z., and Chulanee, A. 2021, June 15.China’s pandemic diplomacy in South Asia. ISAS Insights. https://www.isas.nus.edu.sg/papers/chinas-pan demic-diplomacy-in-south-asia/accessed on 02.10.2023. Hsieh, P .L. 2021. New Asian regionalism in International Law. Cambridge University Press. Huang, Y. 2017, October 30. The four traps China may fall into. Council on Foreign Relations. https://www.cfr.org/blog/four-traps-china-may-fall. Ishida, M. 2019. GMS economic corridors under the belt road initiative. Journal of Asian Economic Integration 1 (2): 183–206.

15 NEOLIBERALISM, GEOECONOMICS AND THE CHINESE … 273 Kavalski, E. 2013. The struggle for recognition of nuclear powers: Norma- tive power Europe and normative Power China in context. Cooperation and Conﬂict, 48(2): 247–267. Lau, S. 2023, May 4. China’s club for talking to Czechs is dead Czechs say. Politico. https://www.politico.eu/article/czech-slam-china-xi-jinping-poi ntless-club-for-central-europe/. Mederois, E. S. 2009. China’s foreign policy objectives. In China’s International Behavior: Activism, Opportunism and Diversiﬁcation, pp. 45–60. RAND. Mingyang, T., and Cong, W. 2023, February 16. China, ﬁve Central Asian nations hold forum to boost industry, investment cooperation. Global Times. https://www.globaltimes.cn/page/202302/1285604.shtml. Morita, N. 2012. The greater Mekong Subregion: My memories expectations. In Greater Mekong Subregion: Twenty Y ears of Partnership. Asian Development Bank. Nye, J. Jr. 2023. Soft power and great-power competition, shifting sands in the balance of power between the United States and China, Springer. Ofﬁcial website of the CPEC Secretariat under the Ministry of Ministry, Development and Planning Initiatives. n.d. https://cpec.gov.pk/gwadar. Pal, D. 2021. China’s inﬂuence in South Asia: Vulnerabilities and Resilience. Carnegie Endowment for International Peace Paper. Palit, A. 2017, February 13. The MSR economic corridor: Character and implications. Commentaries, Observer Research Foundation. Passi, R. 2021. The BRI: A white elephant in the making? In Pant, H.V. and Saha, P . (eds.), Mapping the Belt and Road Initiative: Reach, Implications and Consequences. Observer Research Foundation. Pempel, T.J. 2010. Soft balancing, hedging, and institutional Darwinism: The economic-security Nexus and East Asian regionalism. Journal of East Asian Studies 10: 209–238. Qian, X. 2016. The new silk route in West Asia under the belt and road initiative. Journal of Middle Eastern and Islamic Studies (in Asia), 10(1). Ravenhill, J. 2010. ‘The new East Asian regionalism’: A political domino effect. Review of International Political Economy, 20(20): 178–208. Seth, F. N. and Hoang T. H. The Mekong river ecosystem in crisis: ASEAN cannot be a bystander. Perspective. Narine, S. 2002. Explaining ASEAN, regionalism in Southeast Asia. Lynne Rienner. Shiwei, S. 2022, December 8. BRI projects and programmes: China Arab cooperation ‘1+2+3’ cooperation pattern. CGTN. https://news.cgtn.com/ news/2022-12-08/BRI-Projects-Programs-China-Arab-states-1-2-3-cooper ation-pattern-1fAE45LdebS/index.html. Singapore-Kunming Rail Link (SKRL). n.d. https://www.railway-technology. com/projects/singapore-kunming-rail-link-skrl/.

274 I. NASKAR Singh,K. J. 2020, October 30. Why Beijing hit the reset on BRI and CPEC. Opinion, Times of India. https://timesoﬁndia.indiatimes.com/blogs/ generals-jottings/why-beijing-hit-the-reset-on-bri-cpec/. Small, A. 2020. Returning to the shadows: China, Pakistan and the fate of the CPEC. The German Marshall Fund of the United States Report No.16. Speech by H.E. Xi Jinping at the Opening Ceremony of The Belt and Road Cooperation for International Cooperation. 2017, May 16. Xinhua. Toktomushev, K. 2019, February 22. The belt and road initiative: The march of white elephants? China-US Focus. https://www.chinausfocus.com/ﬁnance- economy/the-belt-and-road-initiative-the-march-of-white-elephants. Vision and Actions on Jointly Building Silk Road Economic Belt and 21st- Century Maritime Silk Road. 2015, March. National development and reform commission, ministry of foreign affairs of China and ministry of commerce of people’s republic of China with State Council Autho- rization. https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/eng/topics_665678/2015zt/xjpcxbayz lt2015nnh/201503/t20150328_705553.html. Wang, C. 2021, March. Interpretation of Xi Jinping’s exposition on the spiritual independence of the Chinese Nation. International Journal of Social Science Studies, 9(2): 31–35. Wigell, M. 2016. Conceptualizing regional powers’ geoeconomic strategies: Neo- imperialism, neo-mercantilism, hegemony, and liberal institutionalism. Asia Eur J. 13: 135–151. Yoshimatsu, H. 2010, January. The Mekong Region, Regional Integration and Political Rivalry among ASEAN China and Japan.Asian Perspective, 34(3), 7–11. Zen, J., and Jones, L. 2019, February. Understanding China’s ‘belt and road initiative” beyond ‘grand strategy’ to a state transformation analysis. Third World Quarterly, 40(8): 1415–1439. Zen, J. 2019, March 12. Narrating China’s belt and road initiative. Global Policy.

CHAPTER 16 India’s Role in the Indo-Paciﬁc Region: An Overview of Strategic Geopolitical Convergences Sayantani Sen Mazumdar Taking cue from historical evidences it can be stated that sea power was never of considerable relevance to either India or China. In fact, the geopolitical strategies of the two great Asian civilisations were steered more by the precept of continentalism (Raja Mohan 2013: 36). However, the process of globalisation largely galvanised these two Asian neighbours to accord impetus to extensive maritime strategy along with territorial defence from the mid-1950s onwards. Crucial initiatives of Den Xiaoping in the political arena like reintegration of China into the world economy, greater emphasis on bolstering equations with the major powers and a bid to establish a peaceful environment outlined the groundwork of addressing the perils in its borders from the early 1980s. As China began to undertake productive stances for the stabilisation of internal security S. S. Mazumdar (B) Diamond Harbour Women’s University, Sarisha, India e-mail: senmazumdarmimi@gmail.com © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapor e Pte Ltd. 2024 O. Mishra and S. Sen (eds.), Global Political Economy, Geopolitics and International Security , https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-97-2231-0_16 275

276 S. S. MAZUMDAR architecture through resolution of border disputes, it provided greater room for substantial nurturing of maritime paradigms. From the 1980s under the leadership of Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi, India adopted outward-looking approach and began to open up. Since the early 1990s, India has been yielding the fruits of globalisation and got inclined to an active maritime strategy thereby being the harbinger of an expansive national maritime power (Raja Mohan 2013: 39). Geopolitics and Asia–Pacific Region The study of geopolitics underlines that Mahan’s perception of the expan- sion of Russian power and its urge of reinforcing control over the seas of all directions in Asia undoubtedly accredited his successors with the ability to decipher the popular geopolitical conceptions of ‘Eurasia’ and the unﬂinching struggle between ‘sea power’ and ‘land power’. Halford Mackinder in his arguments emphasised on the contestation between the ‘pivot’ area that primarily included Russia, Eastern Europe and Central Asia and the rest of the ‘marginal’ regions, which are placed around the Eurasian landmass. Mackinder asserted that Asia would be domi- nated by the one, who dominated the pivot area(Mahan 2003: 66). While Mackinder focused on the signiﬁcance of land power, Nicholas Spykman gave prominence on the coalition of maritime powers because of the ability to defeat the dominant forces in the heartland through the means of controlling the marginal regions in Eurasia(Spykman 1994). Conse- quently, there is the onset of a persisting geopolitical tension between the ‘heartland’ and ‘rimland’ in Eurasia. The credibility of the United States as a great power at the turn of the twentieth century and its potential to administer both the Atlantic and the Paciﬁc Oceans helped in developing the strategic representation of Eurasia and the relevance of the United States as the adjudicator among the many powers of that vast space. The concept or impression of heartland in Eurasia gained momentum more particularly after the disintegration of the Soviet Union and the contes- tation among the major powers for the expansion of inﬂuences in the newly independent republics in Central Asia. Crucial facets like Russia’s efforts to reclaim its eminence in the so-called near abroad in the ﬁrst decade of the twenty-ﬁrst century, its collaboration with China in Central Asia as well as Beijing’s paramount advocacy of the Shanghai Coopera- tion Organisation (SCO) have imparted renewed vigour to the notion of Eurasia. But it is to be borne in mind that the perception of Eurasia’s

16 INDIA’S ROLE IN THE INDO-PACIFIC REGION … 277 centrality in our geopolitical understanding of the world may not be in tandem with the emergence of Asian neighbours like China and India and their increasing maritime capabilities. Unlike Mahan and Mackinder, Spykman, having written after more than three decades, predominantly focused on the growth of large territorial units and on the possibilities of China and India becoming part of the great-power constellation in the near future. The steady rise of China and its joining the East Asian miracle in the early 1990s have been indicative of the fact that the world’s economic gravity has started shifting from the Euro-Atlantic to the Asia– Paciﬁc region. The increasing growth of India posed as a challenge to the expanding supremacy of China at the turn of the twenty-ﬁrst century. The implications of the rise of the two Asian giants made way for the impression of a permanent confrontation between the Eurasian rimlands and heartland to become less reasonable (Calder 1996). The prime focus of the Indo-Paciﬁc region is centred on the ocean, as it is the cord that conjoins its vast stretch and India does play a vital strategic role in the Indian Ocean. The terms ‘Indo-Paciﬁc’ and ‘Asia– Paciﬁc’ are often used interchangeably in geostrategic discourses but it is pertinent to underscore that these two terms are markedly different from each other. By ‘Asia–Paciﬁc’ the area of Asia lying in the Paciﬁc Ocean is denoted. It predominantly entails the coherence and common interests by the Asia’s Paciﬁc powers shared in their common region. The stretch of Asia–Paciﬁc into three parts comprising North-East Asia, Southeast Asia and Oceania highlights that territorially India is not a part of this Asia–Paciﬁc region, which gains credence more due to economic reasons rather than security ones. The multilateral institution, APEC (Asia–Paciﬁc Economic Cooperation Forum), underlines the increasing signiﬁcance of the Asia–Paciﬁc region, of which India is not a member (Javaid 2021). On the other hand, the Indo-Paciﬁc region portrays that expanse, which connects the Indian Ocean and the Paciﬁc Ocean as well as the ambit of the land surrounding them. The Indo-Paciﬁc region primarily projects the shift of relevance to the East from the West and the conjoining of the important sea lines of communication comprising the littorals of the two Oceans has rendered intense signiﬁcance both in strategic and economic terms. India is chieﬂy a maritime nation and there is substantive refer- ence of the practice of maritime trade in the annals of its international equations with other countries. India is connected with its major trade partners primarily through the Indian Ocean. It is estimated that nearly 70 per cent of India’s merchandise trade per annum is conducted via

278 S. S. MAZUMDAR sea route. India has been experiencing large-scale growth in commercial and subsistence activities at sea, which are imperative for its economic advancement as the maritime pursuits related to trade and transportation, resource exploitation as well as the leisure industry accrue better oppor- tunities for livelihood. Given the economic prospect of the Indo-Paciﬁc region, a number of countries are investing ample ﬁnancial, technological and human capital to expand maritime economies and are endeavouring to harness their unique strengths. Large volume of world’s oil shipments, nearly over 60 per cent traverse to China, Japan and other economies from the Middle East’s oil ﬁeld through the Indian Ocean and about 70% of the container trafﬁc passes through this Ocean to and from the indus- trial countries of Asia and other regions of the world. All these attributes render intense strategic relevance to the Indian Ocean thereby attracting the attention of China’s leaders and policy-makers. It is pertinent to underscore that the trafﬁc or trade transaction across the Atlantic has decreased considerably and that across the Paciﬁc is not actively mobile but conduction of trade across the Indian Ocean has escalated signiﬁ- cantly. But the Indian Ocean faces myriad security threats and certain parts especially the west around the Horn of Africa and next to the Strait of Malacca in the east are vulnerable to the alarming activities of the pirates and the terrorists, who are posing fundamental geopolitical threats to the stability of the region. The Ocean has also been a centre stage of confrontation among the major players on a number of occa- sions. For instance, in the case of India it started with the border conﬂicts ultimately culminating in the 1962 War with China, and Japan has for decades been involved in a dispute with China on the issue of control- ling of a group of islands in the East China Sea, referred to as Senkaku in Japanese and Diaoyutai in Chinese (Lintner 2018: 272). China’s keen- ness in opening a corridor down to the Indian Ocean was ﬁrst expressed in September 1985 as the country was advancing towards a market-oriented economy from rigid socialism. China in fact outlined the feasibility of ﬁnding an outlet for trade transactions for China’s landlocked south- western provinces of Yunnan, Sichuan and Guizhou with a combined population of 160 million people through Myanmar down to the Indian Ocean (Qi 1985). In addition to the tension along and across the border, the Indian Ocean emerges as the cause of animosity between the two neighbours, India and China. The Chinese are making forays into what India has always considered as its own arena and that might lead to a conﬂicting scenario. China is overtly vigilant and keeps a close watch on

16 INDIA’S ROLE IN THE INDO-PACIFIC REGION … 279 the sea lanes used by its suppliers of oil in the Middle East, a move that is challenging India’s primacy in the Indian Ocean. Recent collaborative naval exercises between India and the United States along with Japan’s concerns are indicative of the plausibility of a new ‘Cold War’ like situ- ation but this time China not the Soviet Union shall act as the main adversary(Lintner 2018: 24). Indo-Paciﬁc as a Realm of Strategic Dynamics It is asserted that the intricacies of the equations between China and India in the Indian and the Paciﬁc Oceans will be ordained not only by the rationale of the Sino-Indian bilateral relations but will be determined by the kind of policies that the other regional powers along with the United States as the leading maritime power in the Indo-Paciﬁc might endorse. The transition or development in the position of world lead- ership is intermittently connected with the shifts in allocation of the Seapower (Modelski and Thompson 1988: 18). A considerable boost in the volume of external trade of both India and China was visible in the last quarter of the twentieth century due to the fallout of globalisation on their respective economies. The purview of integration of China in 1978 and India in 1991 with the world economy expanded widely with the eradication of their voluntarily chosen economic isolation. Measures like less dependence on foreign trade, more emphasis on import substi- tution and according signiﬁcance to exports were adopted by both the neighbours in order to curb restrictions on imports thereby booming up the growth strategy. As a consequence, both the countries experienced growth in trade to a large extent. For example, the seaborne trade in China and India has touched upon 90% of total trade and the vast expanse of their economies, rapid rate of economic growth, growing interde- pendence and interconnectedness with the world economies mandate investments in naval modernisation by both the countries. Since India’s economic progress is directly related to the growth of its overseas trade and commercial transactions most of its trade is of maritime nature. India is steered to maintain parity, economic prosperity and naval capability, a prerequisite for protection of the nation’s vast and varied maritime concerns. It is often being cited that the American dispatch of the aircraft carrier USS Enterprise during India’s war with Pakistan in 1971 under- scored India’s imperative for a powerful navy (Tellis 1987: 185–219). China, too, being conscious about interconnectedness between national

280 S. S. MAZUMDAR economic development and sea power in this era of globalisation, has been consistently focusing on the building of a strong and modern navy (Raja Mohan 2013: 41). The US decision to send aircraft carriers into the Taiwan Strait to prevent Beijing’s intimidation of Taiwan in 1996 might have politically fuelled up the development of Chinese capacities for considerable reorientation of its maritime strategy and to thwart potential American interventions(Scobell 2000: 227–246). The prevalence of marked differences between the naval conﬁdence building measures and the conﬁdence building initiatives of the land- based armed forces is very much apparent. The naval forces are not separated or demarcated by national boundaries and while operating in international waters they exhibit distinctive facets like mobility, ﬂexibility, long-range and potentially global outreach. And unlike armies on the border that are mostly controlled tightly by the headquarters, the naval forces leave greater scope for initiative and leadership by the commander at sea. Navies, also as a matter of fact, are liable to intersect with commer- cial rules as well as law and order directives at sea thereby accruing greater opportunities for contact and communication between the navies. However, the distinct characteristics of the naval forces at times might be a cause of a series of difﬁculties. The intractable obstacles, variations on size, technical and operational abilities, and movement demand trade- offs between a range of parameters on both sides are not always easy to regulate. Factors like port calls, high-level naval exchanges and activities do improve equations between the naval establishments and render valu- able channels of communication. However, it needs to be underscored that they do not provide the political space for discussion and analysis of the conﬂict dynamics and the viable mechanism to address mutual inter- ests and misconceptions. While the political leadership concedes that the Asian neighbours, India and China are not a threat to each other and Asia has the credence to accommodate their objectives and simultaneous rises, the strategic communities on both sides are not so optimistic and have fathomed adversarial images of each other. It is a concerning factor for many Chinese scholars that India might cooperate with the US Navy to block Beijing’s energy lifeline at the Strait of Malacca. To address the increasing volume of misperceptions about each other’s strategic inten- tions in the Indo-Paciﬁc, India and China sought to launch a maritime security dialogue in April 2012, when the foreign minister of China, Yang Jiechi, was in India (Tuteja in Raja Mohan 2013: 203).

16 INDIA’S ROLE IN THE INDO-PACIFIC REGION … 281 The proliferation of China’s dominance more particularly in the ﬁeld of economic and commercial development has opened up a plethora of challenges to the United States, which is encountering an economic slow- down. The persistent rise of Chinese military strength and its increasing political leverage on its Asian periphery have raised fundamental ques- tions about the prospect of US primacy in Asia and the tenability of its regional alliances. The perception of a collaborative venture between India and the United States in response to China’s continued rise is also buttressed by the shared democratic values between New Delhi and Washington, which is in sharp contrast to Beijing’s authoritarian polit- ical system. Herein China stands as the primary challenge to the United States and India is a potential strategic partner. Tellis argues that the present American approach towards China is largely being deﬁned by the threat of the possible power transition and with China’s expanding supremacy, this American attitude might get all the more competitive and hostile. In this context, the possibility of India to become a signiﬁcant partner of the United States gets increased. Keeping in mind the existing juxtaposition between the two Asian neighbours it may be asserted that even before exerting inﬂuence on the US preponderance, China’s growth would directly act as an impediment to India’s elevation as a global player (Tellis et al. 2012). At this critical juncture, it is a matter of deep concern to decipher the role of the United States especially the manner in which it can address the Chinese preponderance and increasing naval power of India. The two countries possess the capacity to inﬂuence world’s maritime politics as they lead about two billion people to the seas. The changing dynamics are bound to exert major implications on all dimensions of the Indo- Paciﬁc, including the balance of power system in the region, exploration of opportunities on its littoral and the seabed as well as the safeguarding of peace and order including the maintenance of sea lines of communi- cation. The emergence of China and India and their expanding overtures on the Indo-Paciﬁc region call for the restructuring of the US maritime policies. The naval undertakings of China and India will recast the nitty–gritty of Sino-Indian relations as well. The outcomes of the Sino-Indian contes- tation in the Indo-Paciﬁc region are to a large extent conditioned by the reverberation of the United States to the simultaneous rise of China and India perhaps leading to the abrupt dawning of a ‘strategic triangle’ among Washington, Beijing and New Delhi. A strategic triangle implies

282 S. S. MAZUMDAR a condition in which the policies of one have far-reaching impact on the collaboration between the other two on a sustained basis in time and space. The Bush administration’s emphasis on the balance of power in Asia, which promotes freedom, has intensely induced the growth of schol- arly and public interest in a triangular dynamic among the United States, China and India (Ayres and Raja Mohan 2009). It can be stated that the changing power equations in the Indo- Paciﬁc region have made the US jittery and it has started vacillating between different policies. For instance, the foreign policy perspective under George W. Bush used to be inclined more towards India for the cause of restraining the Chinese power in Asia (Friedberg 2011: 245–263). The US policy to sustain American primacy in Asia involved a number of new initiatives like the strengthening of US alliances in Asia, rebalancing the global military disposition towards the Asia–Paciﬁc region and focusing on a new viable approach in order to endure the expansion of the Chinese power. The United States sought to expand its military partnerships and outreach in the arc extending from the Western Paciﬁc and East Asia into the Indian Ocean region and South Asia wherein defence cooperation with India is the strategic crux. India has been accorded central position by the United States as it is one of the largest and most dynamic countries in this region with paramount military capabilities. India emphasises on a set of principles upholding international security and prosperity and the US Defence Secretary Leon Panetta described India as the ‘lynchpin’ of the geopolitical strategies highly discernible in this vast stretch(Raja Mohan 2013: 241). Though Obama’s ‘pivot to Asia’ largely signiﬁed the strategic relevance of India New Delhi is keenly concerned about the shifting power balance between Washington and Beijing. India is quite apprehensive about the foreseeable US-China bilateral strategic understanding (Raja Mohan 2023: 241). Chinese construction projects, its attempts to turn tiny shoals and rocks into sovereign-territory islands in the South China Sea and the move- ment of warships have made the South China Sea one of the world’s most closely watched regions, with spy satellites from various countries zooming in on the region since any unusual development in this geopo- litical hotbed may adversely impact the balance of power. In many ways, China has won the battle for the Spratly Islands as other players like the United States, the Philippines, Vietnam, Malaysia, Brunei and Taiwan, avoid conﬂict that would have wide-ranging disastrous consequences.

16 INDIA’S ROLE IN THE INDO-PACIFIC REGION … 283 China’s motive behind the launching of the BRI cannot be properly assessed. Apparently it seems to be a platform wherein there is efﬁcient allocation of resources and integration of markets for the beneﬁt of all the participants but actually it is a well synchronised plan to exert Chinese dominance over much of the developing nations. Japan has offered infras- tructure development projects in the region as ‘quality infrastructure’ compared to China’s initiatives of ‘construction schemes’ as an alternative to the BRI (Lintner 2019: 217–235). Japan and India have embarked upon a number of endeavours like the Quad to bolster their coopera- tion. Although regional naval cooperation actually commenced in 2007 with annual collaborative exercises, called Exercise Malabar, by India, Japan, Australia, Singapore and the United States, they were initially conducted with relatively informal arrangements in the seas of Japan. But in 2015 Exercise Malabar was developed with more participants after an agreement between Prime Minister Modi and President Obama and the organisation of a joint naval activity by the United States, India and Japan in the Bay of Bengal. India’s ﬂeet is active in the region with substantial aircraft carriers, submarines and over 90 other kinds of ships. The Indian Navy is into a modernisation drive to promote its submarines and other vessels especially those that can detect foreign submarines. Meanwhile, China has also invested in various port projects in the region such as Kyaukphyu in Myanmar, Chittagong in Bangladesh, Hambantota in Sri Lanka and Gwadar in Pakistan. China is primarily a huge inland empire with a relatively short coastline for a country of its size and its landlocked inland provinces have to depend on outlets and channels through neigh- bouring countries for trade with the outside world. The deep seaport in Gwadar has immense strategic importance as it, combined with the Karakoram Highway, which was opened in 1979, links northern Pakistan with Xinjiang thereby rendering western China a direct outlet to the Indian Ocean. Kyaukphyu in Myanmar was constructed to realise the goal of development for Yunnan and other south-western Chinese provinces, which are distantly located from China’s own ports. Chinese plans to open a trade route from Tibet through Sikkim down to the port of Kolkata have been met with acute scepticism in India (Lintner 2018: 273).

284 S. S. MAZUMDAR India’s Role in the Indo-Pacific Region There is a growing realisation that a stable and secure maritime envi- ronment in India’s neighbourhood is a prerequisite for development and prosperity of the country. Efﬁcient and improved maritime connectivity is of utmost importance for strengthening of India’s regional and global trade. Greater maritime connectivity between India and its trade part- ners across the world is one of the bases for the integration of the economies of the Indo-Paciﬁc region. In his Keynote Address at the Shangri La Dialogue on 1 June 2018 at Singapore, PM Modi under- lined India’s key role in bolstering of maritime security and cooperation in the Indo-Paciﬁc region. A robust approach to rejuvenate India’s maritime connectivity with its neighbouring countries would not only accelerate India’s merchandise trade but also unravel opportunities for industrial development as well as highlight trade potential in the Indo- Paciﬁc region. For the sustenance of the facets of maritime commons like connectivity, security and cooperation, the Indo-Paciﬁc countries need to embark upon crucial initiatives leading to better facilitation of the warning or relief systems. For example, proper coordination and synergy among the Early Warning Centres, including for tsunami warnings, could co-exist with the Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief (HADR) Exercises and SOPs (Standard Operating Procedures) for HADR for the capacity building measures in this area prone to natural disasters. There- fore, a priority of maritime cooperation in the Indo-Paciﬁc region is to achieve a secure, viable and effective multimodal transport system in the region. In this connection, certain propositions may be put forward like the organisation of a coordinated and collaborative maritime strategy of India with its immediate and extended neighbours. Initiatives like Sagar- mala may be referred to in this context. India has adopted substantial stances to build infrastructure facilities and capacity building measures at all the major ports under the Sagarmala Project, more particularly on the eastern seaboard. Collaboration with ports located in South- east Asian neighbouring countries like Myanmar, Thailand, Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore and Vietnam can turn Indian ports conducive gate- ways to ASEAN countries and vice-versa. Moreover, the furtherance of multimodal interfaces between land and sea transportation needs to be encouraged. The expansion of interfaces with land, rail, water and pipelines is required since ports are the gateways and avenues to devel- opment. The protection of the maritime environment necessitates the

16 INDIA’S ROLE IN THE INDO-PACIFIC REGION … 285 proper and effective utilisation of the available resources (Economic Times 2023). Most of the Indo-Paciﬁc countries are signatories to the World Trade Organization (WTO) Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA), apart from other pertinent bilateral or regional agreements on trade facilitation. Taking into account certain trade facilitation prerogatives, implemen- tation of regional trade facilitation layout is desirable. Training and capacity building measures should be the focus of the trade facilita- tion programme. Learning from each other’s strengths and weaknesses can contribute to regional integration in an effective way. It is impera- tive for the Indo-Paciﬁc countries to adhere to regulatory convergence in cases of transportation. For the purpose of sharing of information, generation of inter-operability of customs single windows as well as for dispute settlement they should abide by the customs cooperation mechanism. For the simpliﬁcation of trade procedures and promotion of value chains, they may opt for a paperless trading system. For the pioneering of the connectivity agendas, the countries may form working groups and conduct joint studies in order to formulate a vision and an Indo-Paciﬁc connectivity master plan. Increased maritime coopera- tion among the concerned stakeholders would not only enable them to deal with maritime threats and challenges but also facilitate coordina- tion through the prism of maritime multilateralism. It is necessary for the countries to accelerate technical cooperation, capacity building measures, interdependence of experience, knowledge and expertise through various international and national forums. Emphasis should be imparted for the implementation of connectivity projects like Project Mausam for favourable outcome. Greater maritime connectivity in the Indo-Paciﬁc region is ardently required to form greater markets and for the strength- ening of the security system. This will accrue not only to the increase of efﬁciency of maritime services but also lead to the proliferation of trade and investment in the Indo-Paciﬁc region. Discussion, interaction and most importantly dialogue will undoubtedly foster the essence of better mutual understanding and reconciliation. It is pertinent to under- score that the cooperative multilateralism in the Indo-Paciﬁc is directly related to the increase of the connectivity facilities and the decrease of transportation costs. India has modiﬁed its foreign policy approach from the traditional strategy of balancing power to an encouraging approach to balance threat. The balance of threat theory is premised on the notion that the states

286 S. S. MAZUMDAR collaborate to balance against threat dynamics rather than power alone (Walt 1990: 5). In this lieu, factors like geographical congruities, potential and intent of the source of the threat are the crucial variables (Walt 1990: 5). For instance, keeping in mind China’s geographical proximity and its aggressive military capabilities vis-à-vis India, China may be perceived as a potential threat to India’s national security. It is mention worthy that under the multialignment policy, India is cultivating its relations with China’s competitors such as the United States and Japan. The momentum is undoubtedly gaining ground and India’s collaborative endeavours with the United States after ‘pivot to Asia’ policy and the United States’s extension of support to India’s membership in a number of multilat- eral institutions is generating an impression, most particularly among the Chinese population that the United States and Japan are aligning with India to balance China in Asia. India’s collaborative military exercises with the United States, Japan and other contenders of China have further solidiﬁed the perception (Chandra 2017: 107). China has pivotal interests in the region, as like India and Japan, China’s energy security is intermit- tently connected to the safety of the sea lanes of communication in the Indian Ocean. The impediments to energy ﬂows in the Indian Ocean do not come only from the contenders, who have a shared interest in keeping these sea lanes working but also from the local instabilities and hazards in the choke points and certain littorals, particularly the Strait of Hormuz and the Horn of Africa. These problems cannot be solved simply by military enforcement. During the visit of Chinese Premier Wen Jibao to New Delhi in December 2010, India and China professed their shared interests in the Indian Ocean and had consented to cooperate in countering piracy in the Gulf of Aden. It was probably the ﬁrst time that New Delhi and Beijing spoke jointly about maritime security cooperation (Raja Mohan 2013: 208). China and other states may attempt to espouse a strategy leading to the solution rather than breeding the problem. It is to be discerned that the ﬂeets or naval forces of the United States, Japan and India in a combined manner inevitably constitute overwhelming pres- sure on China’s oil supply. It is judicious for the Asian neighbours to have substantive discussions between their security establishments since there is an ongoing advancement of their respective economic interests in the seas as well as naval capabilities. China’s developmental agenda or the endeavour of stimulating the essence of maritime community based on mutual interests and shared future among the Indian Ocean countries are propelled by crucial facets.

16 INDIA’S ROLE IN THE INDO-PACIFIC REGION … 287 China would like to discourage scepticism about its intrusive advances in the region. It would like to underline its credibility as a development partner for economic growth, blue economy and pursuit of the Global Development Initiative in the Indian Ocean region. However, China’s moves in the region are seen as attempt at resisting Indian initiatives like Indo-Paciﬁc Oceans Initiative (IPOI). The IPIO underscores the strengthening of conﬁdence building measures and synergies among the countries on maritime and strategic cooperation. Being apprehensive of increasing Chinese forays in the Indian Ocean region, India has sought to stabilise IPOI and encouraged other countries and organisations like the ASEAN to get associated with the same in order to counter aggressive Chinese stances in the Indian Ocean (Sakhuja 2023). Contemporary intellectual deliberations and the public discourses are marked more by the attributes of hostility between the two neighbours, like the Indian scepticism of Chinese encirclement and Beijing’s appre- hensions of India collaborating with the United States in a naval blockade of Chinese resources. There is little scope for cooperation between the two countries in these analyses. India and China, however, must not undertake any measure that might threaten the security of the Indian Ocean region and it should in no way seem that they are hegemonic in their neighbourhood. Any initiative by either New Delhi or Beijing to form an exclusive sphere of inﬂuence in the waters adjacent to them is bound to create suspicion among the signiﬁcant players, which may propel them to form a coalition to restrain those ambitious overtures. The nurturing of any misperception about each other’s interests is uncalled for and there should be manifestation of some empathy to the concerns of the other. It is to be borne in mind that the maritime dynamics of China and India will not be preconditioned primarily by the overtures of New Delhi and Beijing directed at the other. Rather the naval policy parameters and actions are likely to be streamlined by the larger strategic environment in the Indo-Paciﬁc region. Both China and India need to be able to exert their relevance in their wider maritime neighbourhood. The other countries, their allies and various independent actors will respond robustly to the growing inﬂuence of China and India. It is this interde- pendent gesture that will shape the prospective stability in Asia and its waters. The propensities for the Chinese naval outreach to the Indian Ocean and the ramiﬁcations of India’s emerging proﬁle in the western Paciﬁc are likely to harmonise the Indo-Paciﬁc into a single geopolitical theatre (Raja Mohan 2013: 212).

288 S. S. MAZUMDAR Conclusion Historical inferences have emphasised on consultations and negotiations as the most pragmatic and effective strategy to resolve maritime disputes. In order to achieve the objective of win–win cooperation, it is imperative to manage differences through rules and devising parameters to establish regional peace and stability (Changlin 2017: 37–39). New strategic chal- lenges have arisen in the Indo-Paciﬁc region due to a number of factors like unresolved territorial disputes, the rise of terrorism, non-traditional threats like piracy, transnational crime, etc. Moreover, the existing struc- tures are not competent enough in confronting many current conﬂict situations like those arising from provocations or disturbances in the South China Sea. The emergence of international organisations like the ASEAN is signiﬁcant factor in geopolitical dynamics in the Indo-Paciﬁc region as India and the ASEAN share enduring cultural and historical connects and many political as well as economic lineages. Both sides promote attributes such as the rule of law, international norms and the respect for state sovereignty and multilateral cooperation besides several institutional similarities. The stakeholders in the region need to decipher each other’s concerns and priorities, and it is pertinent to underscore that connectivity can mitigate a number of challenges. Connectivity should uphold solidarity and be based on conﬁdence and trust. To promote connectivity, respect should be paid to sovereignty and territorial integrity of other countries. Due emphasis should be put on the attributes of consultation, good governance, certainty and clarity, vitality as well as sustainability, which are inclined to empower nations and safeguard them from debt burden. Promotion of trade and infrastructure is also needed. For the cause of peace and stability in the Indo-Paciﬁc region, it appears that the policy- makers in both China and India will be keen to venture all three ideas such as cooperative security, a dialogue and discussion process and balance of power. Their respective emergence and relevance have made them more open to regional cooperative mechanisms. But the Asian neighbours will not pursue multilateralism at the cost of their own autonomy. Beijing and New Delhi have exhibited profound interest in more formal dialogue and discussion on maritime security issues with other great powers and at the same time, they have actively followed the policy of balancing each other in the Indo-Paciﬁc region. The vast expanse of the Indo- Paciﬁc strategic space with its distinctive priorities, as the Paciﬁc for China

16 INDIA’S ROLE IN THE INDO-PACIFIC REGION … 289 and the Indian Ocean for India, can spur the emergence of subregional orders. The relative decline of the United States has not subdued its dominance in controlling both the oceans’ spaces as well as depicting the overriding security framework for the Indo-Paciﬁc stretch. The trajectory of the US equations with China and India and the evolving dynamics between Beijing and New Delhi are likely to be the basic contours of the prospective security architecture in the Indo-Paciﬁc region. Though other countries have a role in the political evolution of the littoral, it is the United States that exerts the most vital inﬂuence on the emerging Sino-Indian incongruities in the Indo-Paciﬁc region (Raja Mohan 2013: 243). It is interesting to perceive that the countries of the region, having recognised that there is much to be gained through cooperation rather than through rivalry, have exhibited keenness to collaborate with each other in economic matters. There is indeed much more progress that can be achieved through cooperative endeavours as the region has abundant commonalities that may be optimally harnessed for mutual beneﬁts. India has remained a valuable and important player in this region and has been prioritising connectivity and quality infrastructure through collaborative ventures. Regional harmony is crucial for India’s own geopolitical inter- ests and the strategies are also part of its commitment to implementation of long-term good friendship and cooperation among the regional players in order to attain alignment in common areas of interest and economic well-being of the region. References Ayres, A., and Raja Mohan, C. 2009. Power Realignments in Asia: China, India and the United States.S a g e . Calder, K, E. 1996. Asia’s deadly triangle: How arms, energy and growth threaten to destabilise Asia Paciﬁc, Nicholas Brealey Pub. Chandra, V. 2017. Modi government and changing patterns in Indian Foreign Policy. Jadavpur Journal of International Relations, 21(2). Changlin, M. 2017. China’s perspective on the maritime disputes in the Western Paciﬁc. In Rajesh, M.H. and Sharma, R. K. (eds.) Strategic Balance in the Indo-Paciﬁc Region: Challenges and Prospects. Vij Books India Pvt Ltd. Friedberg, A, L. 2011. A contest for supremacy: China, America, and the struggle for mastery in Asia. W.W Norton. Javaid, A. 2021 February 9. What is the difference between the Indo-Paciﬁc and the Asia-Paciﬁc? Jagranjosh. https://www.jagranjosh.com/general-kno wledge/indo-paciﬁc-vs-asia-paciﬁc 1612883032–1.

290 S. S. MAZUMDAR Lintner, B. 2018. China’s India war collision course on the roof of the world. Oxford University Press. Lintner, B. 2019. The costliest pearl China’s struggle for India’s ocean. Westland Publications. Mahan, A, T. 2003. The problem of Asia: Its effect upon international politics. Revised Edition, Transaction Publishers. Modelski, G. and Thompson, W, R. 1988. Seapower in global politics, 1494–1993. Macmillan. Qi, P . 1985, September 2. Opening to the Southwest: An expert opinion. Beijing Review. Raja Mohan, C. 2013. Samudra Manthan: Sino-Indian rivalry in the Indo- Paciﬁc. Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. Sakhuja, V. 2023, December 27. China’s Indian ocean forays bear scrutiny. The Statesman. Scobell, A. 2000. Show of force: Chinese soldiers, statesmen, and the 1995–96 Taiwan strait crisis. Political Science Quarterly, 115(2): 227–46. Spykman, N, J. 1994. The Geography of the Peace. Harcourt, Brace and Company. Tellis, A.J. 1987. India’s naval expansion: Reﬂections on history and strategy. Comparative Strategy 6 (2): 185–219. Tellis, A.J., Tanner, T., and Keough, J. (eds.) 2012. Asia Responds to its Rising Powers. The National Bureau of Asian Research. The Economic Times 2023. https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/blogs/et- commentary/reshaping-indo-paciﬁc-cooperation/. Walt, S. 1990. The origins of alliances. Cornell University Press.

CHAPTER 17 Analysing Opportunities for India in Africa’s Economic Integration in the Context of the African Continental Free Trade Area Abhishek Mishra The African continent and India share a unique, historical, and inti- mate relationship. They are both connected by ancient maritime links across the waters of the Indian Ocean and an endured common struggle against colonialism and apartheid. Over the years, this historical associa- tion has transformed into a multi-faceted partnership with an emphasis on economic cooperation and development partnership under the rubric of South-South Cooperation (SSC). A qualitative shift in India and Africa’s long-standing ties can be discerned in more recent time. Even during the COVID-19 pandemic, India stood in solidarity with Africa and gifted over 150 tonnes of medical aid to 25 African countries, despite facing many developmental challenges of its own (Beri 2021). Under India’s ‘Vaccine Maitri’ initiative, India supplied 24.7 million doses of ‘Made in India’ A. Mishra (B) MP-Institute for Defence Studies and Analyses, New Delhi, India e-mail: a.mishrapolsc@gmail.com © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapor e Pte Ltd. 2024 O. Mishra and S. Sen (eds.), Global Political Economy, Geopolitics and International Security , https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-97-2231-0_17 291

292 A. MISHRA COVID-19 vaccines en gratis, as well as commercially, which included COVAX supplies to 40 countries in Africa (Chakrabarty 2018). However, the disruptions associated with the pandemic are causing tectonic shifts beneath the global economic landscape. These shifts could eventually bring about signiﬁcant realignment in international relations and the manner in which nation-states would interact in future. Both India and African countries have stood by each other through the most trying times and the new economic realignments at the global level may open up new opportunities for mutually beneﬁcial partnerships between them. This will not only beneﬁt the combined 2.5 billion people residing in both the regions, but could also render greater stability to the rather frayed and fractured global economy. As two vibrant and development-oriented economies and growth poles, India and Africa continue to engage constructively and make efforts to strengthen their mutually beneﬁcial development partnership. Given that both sides are well endowed with natural resources, have access to technology, skilled manpower, entrepreneurs, and ﬁnancing, provides a good rationale for increasing two-way ﬂows in trade and investment. Over the years, India has put in together various important policy frameworks and institutional measures so as to create an enabling trade and business environment with countries from Africa. India’s policy-level focus on Africa was initiated with the launch of the ‘Focus Africa’ programme in March 2002 whose main objective was to increase interactions between the two regions by identifying the areas of bilateral trade and investment (PIB, GoI 2022). The programme initially focused on just 7 targeted countries: South Africa, Ghana, Tanzania, Mauritius, Nigeria, Kenya, and Ethiopia. At present, this programme has been extended to cover the entire African continent. There have been many other important initiatives like the Pan-African e-Network project (PAeNP) which was conceived by former President of India Dr A.P .J. Abdul Kalam and was formally launched on February 26, 2009. This was operationalised in 48 African countries which connected Indian educational institutions and super-speciality medical hospitals with their African countries through a satellite and ﬁbre optic network (Ministry of External Affairs, GoI 2013). This initiative was well-received by Africans and this became Indian government’s ﬂagship projects in Africa. In October 2019, India also launched a network known as the e-VidyaBharati and e-ArogyaBharati (e-VBAB) projects (Business Stan- dard 2018). The pan-Africa e-Network project was based on technology

17 ANALYSING OPPORTUNITIES FOR INDIA IN AFRICA’S … 293 connected to satellite. The e-VBAB has established web-based portals for tele-education and tele-medicine. So far, 17 African countries have joined this e-VBAB initiative. India had also launched the Duty-Free Tariff Preference Scheme (DFTP) for Least Developing Countries (LDCs) in August 2008 (Ministry of Commerce, GoI 2017). This scheme has beneﬁtted 38 African nations. Duty free access to 98.2% of India’s total tariff lines has been extended under the scheme. However, exclusion list includes fruits and vegetables, cashew nuts, tobacco, coffee, tea, spices, wine, and spirits, e t c . w h i c ha r e m u c hi nd e m a n di nA f r i c a . I n d i aw o u l db ee x p e c t e dt o include products that African countries are more interested in exporting to India. Overview of Africa in Recent Years Africa is a transitioning continent with huge trade and investment poten- tial. For a long time, the African continent used to make news for its conﬂict, poverty, or exoticism. Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in Africa was almost exclusively focused on the extraction and export of natural resources. However, over the last couple of decades, Africa has embarked on a process of transformation and growth and has made remarkable progress in a range of economic and developmental areas. The continent is home to nearly 17% of the world’s population, 9.6% of global oil output, 90% of the global platinum and cobalt supply, half of the world’s gold supply, two-thirds of global manganese supply, 35% of the world’s uranium, 75% of world’s coltan, and 54 votes in the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA). Every year, 12 million young people enter the job market while only 3 million formal jobs are created, according to the African Development Bank Group (AfDB) (ADB Group 2016). With a median age of 25 years old, the African continent is the youngest in the world and its population is expected to more than double to 2.2 billion people by 2050. African economies have sustained unprecedented rates of growth, driven mainly by strong domestic demand, improved macroeconomic management, a growing middle class, and increasing political stability. The continent’s GDP is dominated by its commodity-dependent regions, largest being North Africa, followed by West Africa and Southern Africa (UNCTAD World Investment Report 2022). Tourism is a critical source of revenues for many African economies.

294 A. MISHRA However, the COVID-19 pandemic and the Russo-Ukrainian war are signiﬁcantly delaying convergence of African economies with the rest of the world. This year witnessed the continent growing at only 3.6% due to a worldwide slowdown, tighter global ﬁnancial conditions, and a dramatic pickup in global inﬂation (IMF Regional Economic Outlook 2022). Rising food and energy prices are impacting the continent’s most vulnerable, and public debt and inﬂation are at an all-time high. The continent faces an infrastructure ﬁnancing gap of anywhere between US$ 68–108 billion annually (ADB Group 2018). Ultimately, Africa’s safety and prosperity will depend upon tackling inﬂation while supporting growth, building a more food-secure continent, managing the uncertainty in oil prices and energy transition, and using digital currency innovation to deliver ﬁnancial services. It is estimated that by 2030, “Africa will be home to nearly 1.7 billion people and an estimated US$ 6.7 trillion worth of consumer and busi- ness spending” (Signe 2018). Increased political stability in recent years and improving regional integration through initiatives, like the African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA), are making market access easier. The current economic growth and poverty-alleviation efforts mean that more than 43% of the continent’s people are expected to reach middle or upper-class status by 2030 (Signe 2020). According to UNCTAD’s World Investment Report 2022, investment ﬂows to Africa reached a record US$ 83 billion in 2021, rebounding strongly after the disrup- tion caused by the COVID-19 pandemic (UNCTAD World Investment Report 2022). Investments in the continent are moving beyond tradi- tional sectors like the extractive and commodity sectors, towards newer sectors like clean energy, data centres, and the construction of power plants and industrial complexes (Table 17.1). African countries were badly hit by the pandemic and the subsequent slowdown of the global economy, leading to a decline in manufacturing output, trade and investment volumes, tourism, etc. However, several African countries seized the opportunity of the crisis to embark on various macroeconomic and structural reforms. Such reforms are crucial for ensuring an inclusive growth over the long run. Some of these reforms include the uniﬁcation of the Sudanese Pound exchange rate to allow for the determination of currency exchange rates without the interference from the Central Bank of Sudan (Dabanga 2022); fuel subsidy removal reforms in Nigeria (Onuah 2022), etc., among others.

17 ANALYSING OPPORTUNITIES FOR INDIA IN AFRICA’S … 295 Table 17.1 Commodity dependence of Africa’s exports Agriculture and allied products Minerals, ores and metals Fuel Benin, Cabo Verde, Cote d’Ivoire, Djibouti, Ethiopia, Gambia, Guinea-Bissau, Kenya, Madagascar, Malawi, Senegal, Seychelles, Sao Tome and Principe, Somalia, Sudan, Uganda, Tanzania Botswana, Burundi, Burkina Faso, DR Congo, Eritrea, Ghana, Guinea, Liberia, Mali, Mauritania, Namibia, Niger, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Zambia, Zimbabwe Algeria, Angola, Cameroon, Chad, Republic of Congo, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Libya, Mozambique, Nigeria, South Sudan, Togo Source (Export–Import Bank of India 2022: 28) Africa’s Foreign T rade African exports are primarily raw materials and resource-intensive prod- ucts. Therefore, African economies continue to be vulnerable to exoge- nous shocks like the COVID-19 pandemic and Russia’s war in Ukraine which has led to decrease in demand from major emerging and developed economies in recent years. In 2020, the continent’s “total merchan- dise exports declined by 17% to US$ 394.6 billion, whereas imports contracted by 12.1% to US$ 505.2 billion, which subsequently led to widening of the trade deﬁcit” (Export–Import Bank of India 2022:2 ) . Thes continent’s recovery is dependent on the recovery of production and trade with its major partners, like China and the European Union (EU). In 2020, intra-African merchandise trade accounted for 16.2% of the total merchandise trade of Africa, lowest among the regions after Latin America and Oceania (Graph 17.1). In terms of commodity patterns, mineral fuels, oil and its prod- ucts continue to be the largest export item from Africa, whereas its import basket is relatively diversiﬁed compared to its exports. Mineral fuels, mainly dominated by petroleum oil, not crude, and machinery and mechanical appliances, are Africa’s two-largest import items. Other items include electronic and electrical equipment, vehicles, cereals, plastics, among others. In 2020, due to the low productivity and disruptions in value chains induced by the pandemic in United States as well as in Asia and Europe, there was a contraction in both the value and quantities demanded of exports from Africa. Except for United Arab Emirates (UAE) and

296 A. MISHRA Graph 17.1 Trends in Africa’s foreign trade, 2011–2020 (in US$ billion). Source Export–Import Bank of India 2022:3 2 Switzerland, the continent’s exports to all of its major export destinations contracted in 2020. China was the largest market for Africa’s exports, accounting for 14.2% of Africa’s total exports. The UAE has replaced India as the second-largest destination for Africa during 2020 largely due to a decline in Indian import of petroleum oil during the same period. As regards imports, the share of traditional markets like France, the USA, Italy, Germany, as Africa’s key import sources has been declining in recent years. China was the largest source for Africa’s imports, accounting for 19.7% of Africa’s total imports in 2020. However, the continent’s share in China’s global exports has declined from 2019 to 2020. In 2021, China was the major export destination for African countries, followed by India, accounting for 6.5% of Africa’s total exports in 2021 (Export– Import Bank of India 2022: 39). India and Africa’sT r a d e R e l a t i o n s India’s relations with Africa are based on the principles of equality, mutual respect, and beneﬁt and are in line with Africa-led and Africa- owned development. There are four main pillars that deﬁnes India and Africa’s relations, namely; development partnership, trade and investment, defence and maritime security, and robust people-to-people contacts. In a post-pandemic world, the narratives of a rising India and a resilient Africa

17 ANALYSING OPPORTUNITIES FOR INDIA IN AFRICA’S … 297 present abundant prospects for a shared future and interconnected aspira- tions. The operationalisation of the landmark AfCFTA, which came into effect on 1 January 2021, is set to give further boost and lay the ground for deeper integration between India and African economies (Mishra 2018). Broadly speaking, trends in India and Africa’s trade relations show an upward movement. India’s bilateral trade with Africa has remained above US$ 60 billion except during the commodity price slowdown in 2016 and later due to the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020. According to data from the EXIM Bank, “trade between the two sides grew from US$ 68.6 billion in 2011–12 to US$ 89.6 in 2021–22, the highest ever level recorded by both the regions” (CII 2022). With the onset of the pandemic and in line with global developments, trade between the two regions moderated and slowed down during 2020–21 and rebounded in 2021–22, growing by nearly 60%. According to a study by the Confed- eration of Indian Industry (CII), “India’s exports to Africa accounted for 9.5% share in India’s total exports while Indian imports from Africa accounted for 8.1% of total Indian imports” (CII 2022: 12). Countries, like South Africa, Nigeria, Egypt, Togo and Kenya, have been India’s largest export destinations in Africa. On the other hand, South Africa, Nigeria, Guinea, Egypt, and Angola have been India’s top 5 import part- ners from Africa. Not only have Indian exports to Africa grown, but “there has also been a simultaneous increase in African exports to India by around US$5 billion during the same period”. Currently, “Africa’s market share stands at a healthy 8%in India’s overall import basket, while India contributes roughly 9% of Africa’s total imports from outside the continent” (Table 17.2). Major Export Partners—in 2020, South Africa was the leading destina- tion for India’s exports to Africa, accounting for around 13.4% of India’s exports to the region in 2018–19, followed by Nigeria, Egypt, Kenya, Mozambique, and Tanzania (Export–Import Bank of India 2022: 62). Due to the pandemic, most of Indian exports to the region have decreased with few exceptions like Kenya (increased exports of petroleum oil) and Togo (increased exports of cereals, pharmaceutical products, articles of iron and steel, etc.) (Graph 17.2). Major Import Partners—as regards India’s imports from Africa, South Africa has recently replaced Nigeria as India’s top import source due to higher imports of ships, boats, and ﬂoating structures, and copper and

298 A. MISHRA Table 17.2 Pattern of India–Africa bilateral trade 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Share of India’s exports to Africa in India’s global exports (%) 7.7 9.4 10.1 10.9 9.7 8.7 8.2 8.4 9.2 9.4 Share of India’s exports to Africa in Africa’s global imports (%) 4.3 5.0 6.1 5.9 4.9 4.5 4.8 4.6 5.2 5.2 Share of India’s imports from Africa in India’s global imports (%) 8.6 8.8 8.5 8.8 8.6 7.3 8.1 8.2 8.1 7.5 Share on India’s imports from Africa in Africa’s global exports (%) 6.7 7.2 7.1 7.6 8.4 7.1 8.3 8.2 8.1 7.0 Source (Export–Import Bank of India 2022: 62) articles. Nigeria was the second-largest import source followed by Angola, Egypt, Morocco, and others (Graph 17.3). Major export items—petroleum products are the largest items in India’s export basket to Africa, contributing 16% to India’s total exports to Africa during 2020 (Export–Import Bank of India 2022: 64). Most of Indian major export items to Africa have undergone a decline in share except for pharmaceutical products and cereals (Graph 17.4). Major import items—India mostly imports mineral fuels, mineral oils, and its products (mainly crude) from various African countries. These items constitute more than 50% of India’s total import from the conti- nent. However, during 2020, the share of fuel imports from Africa declined as a result of increased imports of other items like natural or cultured pearls, precious or semi-precious stones, inorganic chemicals, edible fruit and nuts, and ores, slag and ash (Graph 17.5). Additionally, in order to improve India–Africa trade and economic rela- tions, it is essential to regularly review and keep a track of the progress and developments made in the trade relations. Therefore, the Ministry of Commerce and Industry regularly reviews India’s trade relations through

17 ANALYSING OPPORTUNITIES FOR INDIA IN AFRICA’S … 299 Graph 17.2 India’s major export destinations in Africa. Note India’s exports to Africa stood at US$ 13.4 billion in 2009–10 and US$ 28.5 billion in 2018–19. Source The Ministry of Commerce and Industry (MOCI), Government of India: and EXIM Bank Analysis Joint Working Groups (JWGs), Joint Commission Meetings (JCMs), and Joint Trade Committees (JTMs). The Ministry of Commerce and Industry along with the Export–Import (EXIM) Bank of India and Confederation of Indian Industries (CII) also organises various conclaves on India–Africa project partnerships. The conclave facilitates discussions on newer areas for partnerships, strength of the participating enter- prises from the two sides explores the possibilities to pursue setting up of Joint Ventures. The ﬁrst meeting had taken place in 2005 and the latest meeting was held in July 2022 on the theme of “Creating Shared Futures” (17th CII-EXIM Bank Conclave on India-Africa Growth Partnership 2022).

300 A. MISHRA Graph 17.3 India’s major import sources from Africa. Note India’s imports from Africa stood at US$ 25.6 billion in 2009–10 and US$ 41.1 billion in 2018– 19. Source The Ministry of Commerce and Industry (MOCI), Government of India: and EXIM Bank Analysis Graph 17.4 India’s major export items to Africa. Note India’s exports to Africa stood at US$ 13.4 billion in 2009–10 and US$ 28.5 billion in 2018–19. Source The Ministry of Commerce and Industry (MOCI), Government of India: and EXIM Bank Analysis

17 ANALYSING OPPORTUNITIES FOR INDIA IN AFRICA’S … 301 Graph 17.5 India’s major import items from Africa. Note India’s imports from Africa stood at US$ 25.6 billion in 2009–10 and US$ 41.1 billion in 2018–19. Source The Ministry of Commerce and Industry (MOCI), Government of India: and EXIM Bank Analysis India’s Duty-Free Tariff Preference Scheme for Least Developed Countries (DFTP-LDC) India’s DFTP-LDC came into effect in August 2008 with tariff pref- erences spread over ﬁve years. The scheme was welcomed by African partners when it was fully operationalised in October 2012, with 85% of India’s total tariff lines made duty-free, 9% of tariff lines enjoying a ‘Margin of Preference’ ranging from 10 per cent to 100% and only 6 per cent of total tariff lines retained in the ‘Exclusion List’ with no duty pref- erences, for the exports from LDCs. However, since then, this scheme has been expanded from April 1, 2014, and now provides full preferential market access on about 98.2% of India’s total tariff lines. As of 2020, it is estimated that 34 out of 47 LDCs have become beneﬁciaries to the scheme, which include 26 African countries (Ministry of Commerce, GoI 2017). The African Continental Free Trade Area and Opportunities for India in Africa’s Economic Integration The African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA), which came into effect on 1 January 2021, is the biggest free trade agreement in the world, given the number of participating countries. Only the World Trade

302 A. MISHRA Organization established in 1994 had a greater number of participating countries. The AfCFTA agreement proposes to progressively eliminate tariffs and remove non-tariff barriers on intra-African trade. While tariff on 10% of items would be eliminated over a period of time, 90 per cent of items would be under a non-tariff regime. Should the participating coun- tries sincerely implement the terms of the agreement, there would be a marked improvement in the volume of trade within the African conti- nent. Since there are a number of non-tariff barriers, their gradual lifting would further contribute to the intra-African trade (UNCTAD 2021). It is remarkable that as of October 2022, 44 of the 54 African signato- ries have deposited their instruments of AfCFTA ratiﬁcation (TRALAC 2022). India, being Africa’s third-largest trading partner and ﬁfth-largest investor, has critical stakes in AfCFTA agreement. Its success can open up the continent for the Indian enterprises like never before. India has been much encouraging of efforts at regional economic integration and the AfCFTA agreement can propel Africa in positive direction with bene- ﬁcial impact on its trade and connectivity within Africa. The AfCFTA, serving 1.3 billion people across 54 African countries with a combined GDP valued at US$3.4 trillion, could provide signiﬁcant impetus to India’s economic engagement with African countries, and help diversify the India-Africa bilateral trade ﬂows (The World Bank 2022). India’s strategy to enhance its trade and investment relations with African countries mostly entails an integrated approach, comprising, inter alia, integrating the continent to the Global Value Chain (GVC), strengthening Africa’s infrastructure and connectivity, and facilitating trade ﬁnance in Africa, among others. In a broad sense, the AfCFTA agreement can run a full course when Africa industrialises and the coun- tries are able to increase productive capabilities in a competitive landscape. Value addition of African products will help to integrate Africa to the GVC and will give the continent an added edge. So far, Indian investment in Africa has concentrated in pharmaceuticals, textiles, or steel industry with a focus on a particular country or with the motive of exporting to the United States or European Union (Afreximbank and EXIM India 2018). However, the investment paradigm needs to shift to the point that the products could be exported in all the parts of the continent, rather than simply exporting outside the African continent. India is placed favourably to help these countries process primary commodities like gold, diamond,

17 ANALYSING OPPORTUNITIES FOR INDIA IN AFRICA’S … 303 raw cocoa, and add value to them. India can certainly prove to be a crucial partner for helping in marketing of these resources. At the 16th edition of the CII-EXIM Bank Conclave on India-Africa Project Partnership held in virtual format in 2021, various opportunities and challenges for India’s relations with African countries in the context of the AfCFTA were discussed by the participants, particularly in the session “Aligning India Africa bilateral trade with AfCFTA” (CII 2021). The resultant inputs and suggestions offered by the participants are useful and relevant to our current discussion. In his address, Dr. Albert G. Zeufack, Chief Economist at the World Bank for Africa Region, suggested three things that government and business community in India and Africa may need to emphasise so as to beneﬁt from the AfCFTA. According to him, there is an inherent need on the Indian side to fully understand the megatrends that are driving Africa’s future and factor these considerations in its decision on policy and investment proposals. The COVID-19 pandemic has brought major disruption to Africa’s economic activity by reducing commodity prices, disrupting global supply chains, and interrupting African coun- tries’ growth trajectories. In 2020, sub-Saharan Africa entered into its ﬁrst recession in 25 years which caused major losses in ﬁnancial resource and viability of mega-development and infrastructure projects (The World Bank 2020). The industrial fabric in many countries is threatened and investments have begun to decline. Therefore, the Indian private sector needs to cultivate a holistic understanding of the trends that will inform Africa in the post-pandemic period. The second point is that both the sides should not be focusing solely on trade balance, whether it is in favour of Africa or India. Due to India’s high domestic demand and energy requirements, India imports much more than it exports to Africa. As per some estimate, Africa will have the largest labour force in the world by 2050, with a youthful and enterprising working-age population. Focus on job creation, therefore, becomes a priority. Therefore, going forward, the Indian private sector in Africa should prioritise targeted investments in sectors which have the potential to create job opportunities. This would help in reduction in poverty. The third consideration that Dr.Zeufack emphasises is the need for Africa and India to agree on the right metrics to measure each other’s success. Both sides should clearly deﬁne and artic- ulate precisely the targets, aims, and objectives. Is it just the volume of trade? Or should it also include the quantum of investments and number

304 A. MISHRA of jobs created? These are crucial considerations that Indian and African business entities need to pay due attention to. Sachin Chaturvedi, Director General, Research and Information System for Developing Countries (RIS), has stressed on the importance of working towards reducing the cost of transaction which is quite high. This would facilitate the banking and ﬁnancial infrastructure to enter Africa. Banking and ﬁnance can help enhance trade and investments. However, from an Indian perspective, India’s banking presence and coverage in Africa is very limited. There has been a reduction in the number of Indian bank branches across Africa. Indian Banks are only present in Mauritius (9), Kenya (5), Botswana (2), and one each in Uganda, South Africa, and Tanzania. Apart from this, the Bank of Baroda has entered into joint ventures in Zambia and Nigeria. Therefore, there is an urgent need for India to increase its banking presence in the continent by not only opening new branches but also buying more equity in African banks and regional development organisations (Mazumdar 2018). Another issue relates to the question of facilitation of trade between the two sides. This is important because it accrues beneﬁt to all coun- tries by allowing better access for businesses, to production inputs from abroad, and by supporting greater participation in the global value chains. This is why at the third edition of the India-Africa Forum Summit (IAFS) in New Delhi, both “India and Africa agreed to work towards creating a conducive environment for trade facilitation in accordance with World Trade Organization’s (WTO) Bali Trade Facilitation Agreement” (Ministry of External Affairs, GoI 2015). There are some lessons to be drawn from countries that have beneﬁtted due to efﬁcient port infrastructure, logistics networks, and dedicated sea lanes in their cooperative arrangement with other countries (Mumin and Schramm 2018). It is well documented that over 90% of goods traded by countries in the African continent is conducted by seas. In certain African countries, the lack of infrastructure, especially in road and railway networks, hampers the transportation. Even for landlocked African countries, maritime gateways are essential. The other transporta- tion modes are expensive and relatively inefﬁcient. In contrast, the sea would provide cheap and easy transportation of goods and freight. As such, African countries are expected to prioritise developing their maritime transport infrastructure. Ports and logistics network would be crucial in this respect. This is exactly what India is trying to accom- plish through the ‘SAGARMALA’ project. Essentially the focus here is on

17 ANALYSING OPPORTUNITIES FOR INDIA IN AFRICA’S … 305 ‘port-led’ holistic development. Under this, India will launch around 41 ports with dedicated facilities that will aim to “reduce the logistics costs for both domestic and export–import cargo through optimised infras- tructure investments” (Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways, GoI 2023). This is exactly what India and Japan, under their joint initiative known as the Asia Africa Growth Corridor (AAGC), are trying to repli- cate in the port of Mombasa in Kenya. Without any doubt, the value chains that will be created and product fragmentation at various levels will require the focused and dedicated attention from the private sector to come in. The development of ports under AfCFTA will be very impor- tant as they will be the vital hubs along which most of the trade and investments will take place, and industrial zones will be set up. While the AfCFTA is expected to help Indian private sector to enter markets in Africa, there are certain on-the-ground, practical chal- lenges that Indian companies would need to consider before making any policy decisions or investment. Considerations related to location where Indian companies will invest and the preferred sector—whether resource-dependent sectors (metals, mining, oil and gas, petrochemicals) or consumer-oriented industries (food, agro-processing, pharmaceuticals, machinery). Indian companies will need to choose better organised and connected countries for new foreign direct investments. These challenges are some key constraints in enhancing Indian engagements in Africa. These constraints include the lack of access to inputs and ﬁnance, high tariff rates, availability of technology and skilled labour, political stability and regulatory framework, level of investor protection, and high cost of labour (Afreximbank and EXIM India 2018: 65). Lack of knowledge of Indian investors about the diversity of African markets is counted as one of the obstacles to right and efﬁcient investment. Unfortunately, knowl- edge asymmetry continues to be one big area of concern which requires to be properly addressed. This aspect possibly led Indian Trade and Economic Council and the India-Africa Trade Council to jointly organise an Indian Economic Dialogue in the AfCFTA which marked the beginning of consultations between the AfCFTA and representatives from India (Business Stan- dard 2021). Presently, India’s dealings with AfCFTA Secretariat in Accra, Ghana, are at a nascent stage. AfCFTA’s own focus is currently on encour- aging more ratiﬁcation from African Union (AU) member states and

306 A. MISHRA addressing Rules of Origin (RoO) details. Ultimately, the direction that AfCFTA takes in the coming years will inform many decisions by Indian business enterprises in this respect. Indian Investments in the African Region Indian investments in Africa have shown a remarkable increase over the last few decades. However, before the 1990s, India was handi- capped as to the lack of sufﬁcient foreign reserve. It was not possible to release necessary foreign exchange. Gradually, with a slew of economic reforms undertaken by Indian government over last two decades, the overall investment ceilings on outward investments have been abolished. Subsequently, because of India’s high growth rate and growing energy demands, India began investing in gas and oil ventures abroad. Histor- ically, India’s business interests and investment decision in Africa were focused on small and medium enterprises. Now bigger Indian companies are in play. Most of these companies have gone to the extractive sector as there is high demand for energy and raw materials in India. India’s own growing proﬁle since 2000 has coincided with a number of countries in Africa also achieving economic growth and development. Africa emerged as an attractive investment destination because of accel- erated growth, burgeoning middle class, abundance of natural resources, especially energy resources. The ﬁrst Indian investment in Africa was in the 1960s. Birla Group had established a textile mill in Ethiopia. Since then, Indian investments have diversiﬁed in both geographical and secto- rial terms, from the traditional destination of East and Southern Africa— comprising of mostly English-speaking Anglophone countries—to North, West, and Central Africa. According to data from the Ministry of Finance, Government of India, and the Reserve Bank of India (RBI): “approved India’s cumulative investments in Africa during April 1996 to March 2022 amounted to US$ 73.9 billion” (Export–Import Bank of India 2022: 10). Mauritius, Mozambique, Sudan, Egypt, and South Africa were the top destinations of India’s investment, making the country the ﬁfth-largest investor in the African continent (Table 17.3). Some of the major Indian companies investing in Africa countries are Oil and Natural Gas Corporation—Videsh Limited (Sudan, Libya, Demo- cratic Republic of Congo, Cote d’Ivoire, and Mozambique), Reliance Industries Limited (Egypt), Varun Beverages (Morocco), Bharti Airtel

17 ANALYSING OPPORTUNITIES FOR INDIA IN AFRICA’S … 307 Table 17.3 India’s overseas investments in Africa (US$ million) Country April 1996– March 2013 2013– 2014 2014– 2015 2015– 2016 2016– 2017 2017– 2018 2018– 2019 2019– 2020 2020– 2021 2021– 2022 April 1996–March 2022 Mauritius 34,048.2 4581.9 4580.8 3670.4 5392.7 1387.1 3086.8 2940 2496.8 872.2 63,056.9 Mozambique 22.8 2643.1 7.7 1.7 8 37.3 40.2 150.4 323.1 2261.4 5495.7 Sudan 1238.7 – – – – – – – 12.2 22.5 1273.4 Egypt 934.3 29.2 17.6 8.3 1 13.8 22 0.2 0.2 0.6 1027.2 South Africa 389 19.1 29.5 60.6 32.5 64.9 54.8 12.8 15.1 7.2 685.5 Kenya 161.6 1.8 6.1 3.8 7.8 28.1 20.7 22 16.4 7.5 275.8 Libya 220 27.2 7.4 0.1 0.5 0.6 5.1 1 0.1 0.1 262.2 Tunisia 9.9 103.5 – 82.2 0.1 2.5 – – – – 198.2 Liberia 191.8 0.3 0.2 – – – – – – – 192.3 Nigeria 99.3 6.6 12.7 0.6 5 4.3 9.7 12.3 34.8 2.7 188.0 Africa Total 37,790.1 7492.5 4790.2 3970.5 5520.9 1651.6 3335.5 3208.7 2935.1 3228.4 73,923.5 India Total 191144.1 36900.5 30919.5 22016.5 24901.5 18654.9 21322.6 20995.4 18619.2 24955.2 410429.4 Share of Africa (%) 19.77 20.30 15.50 18.00 22.20 8.90 15.60 15.30 15.76 12.94 18.01 Source (Export–Import Bank of India 2022: 75)

308 A. MISHRA (South Africa, Kenya), Essar Group, TATA Group (Zambia, South Africa, Mozambique, and Cote d’Ivoire), and Gujarat State Petrol Corporation (Egypt). For Indian investors, the most preferred method of investment is by setting up a Wholly Owned Subsidiary (WOS) or by buying and acquiring shares in an existing company. Other method includes investing through joint ventures, mainly to serve regional and local markets. Africa’s manu- facturing sector, followed by ﬁnancial, insurance, real estate and business services, and wholesale and retail trade, restaurants and hotels are the targets for investment. Mauritius accounts for the vast majority of both inward and outward Foreign Direct Investments (FDI) movements between India and Africa. This is because of the favourable and advantageous tax conditions and suitable ﬁnancial facilities in Mauritius. Between 2008 and 2016, “Indian FDI outﬂows to Mauritius totalled US$47.6 billion” (Chakrabarty 2018). This is not a one-way process. Mauritius accounts for a majority share of India’s overall FDI inﬂows, followed by Mozambique, South Africa, Seychelles, Morocco, and Kenya. In April 2021, India signed the Comprehensive Economic Cooperation and Partnership Agreement (CECPA) with Mauritius after years of nego- tiations (Ministry of Commerce, GoI 2021). Mauritius is the ﬁrst African country with which India has signed such an agreement. The agreement covers 310 export items for India including foodstuff and beverages, agri- cultural products, textile and textile articles, base metals, electrical, and electronic items, among others. Mauritius will beneﬁt from preferential market access into India for 615 products including frozen ﬁsh, sugar, biscuits, fresh fruits, mineral water, beer, medical and surgical equip- ment, soaps, etc. As regards trade in services, Indian service providers are likely to have access to around 115 subsectors from the 11 broad service sectors like professional services, research and development, higher education, environmental, ﬁnancial, tourism, telecommunication, among others. However, for the Indian exporters to avail preferential beneﬁts under the India-Mauritius CEPCA, they are required to obtain a Certiﬁ- cate of Origin (CoO) from authorised Indian agencies (India-Mauritius CECPA 2021). Overall, “Indian investments in Africa can be characterised by large- scale investments in oil, gas, and mining sector by public sector enter- prises” (Chakrabarty 2018: 25). However, on a point of caution, the record of these companies is not bright and they have been criticised

17 ANALYSING OPPORTUNITIES FOR INDIA IN AFRICA’S … 309 widely. Many times, these public sector enterprises have had to give up on their acquired blocks due to problems related to availability of skill, unvi- able prospects and at times due to the failure to live up to the obligations under the contract. Investments from private companies have focused on the manufac- turing sector, in hotels, and petrochemicals. However, only few of the countries in Africa have attracted such investment from Indian compa- nies. The investments have been motivated by “access to raw materials and market-entry strategies” (Chakrabarty 2018: 26). Moreover, these big private companies are constantly competing with SMEs who have also invested in manufacturing sector and are likely to have a stronger impact on African development by creating new jobs. Lack of access to inputs and adequate ﬁnance are the key constraints in doing business in Africa. Issues such as political stability/regulatory framework, availability of technology, skilled labour, cost of labour, level of investor protection, and tariff rates are somewhat moderate to large constraints to successfully do business in Africa. Stakeholders need to identify and rectify these bottlenecks and challenges. Therefore, India is not only looking to expand its export basket to include a whole range of products according to African needs, but is also aiming to diver- sify its investments in new sectors other than the traditional sectors of investment. Without any doubt, economic cooperation between the two sides has opened up varied opportunities, including a particular focus on development cooperation. Establishing V alue Chains for Utilisation of AfCFTA The AfCFTA is expected to have transformational impact on the African economy. The single, uniﬁed, liberalised, and continental market that African countries are attempting to establish could unlock the continent’s manufacturing potential, facilitate industrialisation, and drive sustainable growth and jobs. India, being one of Africa’s oldest trading partners, is well positioned to leverage the AfCFTA and its impact on bolstering Regional Production Networks (RPNs) to broad-base Indian companies’ operations in different regions of Africa. The continent’s large working population, its growing middle class, and the signiﬁcant share of services are all conducive factors for enhancing India’s trade and investments in Africa. Consumer-driven goods related to agribusiness, pharmaceuticals,

310 A. MISHRA apparel and clothing, and automotive components are opportunities for increasing Indian FDI where Africa, through the AfCFTA is putting in place the appropriate Rules of Origin (RoO) and progressively eliminating both tariff and non-tariff barriers. Currently, Africa’s exports to India are dominated by 5 African coun- tries which account for over two-thirds of total African exports to India. Therefore, there is a need for India to explore and diversify its import basket to include other sources from Africa. Similarly, Indian exports to Africa are also heavily concentrated in a few large economies with the top 5 destinations of South Africa, Nigeria, Egypt, Togo, and Kenya accounting for nearly half the total exports to Africa. Subsequently, Indian companies are attempting to expand their exports to top African economies, based on their GDP size and population, and also expand imports from these top African economies. Sourcing more goods from other African economies would be beneﬁcial for the trade partnership. Going forward, Indian businesses and companies would look to invest in African economies with a view to exporting to India and serving local markets and people. It is important for Indian investors to view Africa not just as a destination for short-term returns, but also as a partner for medium- and long-term economic growth. A recent study by the CII, by using data from the International Trade Centre (ITC), uses the Export Specialization Index (ES Index) to deter- mine potential export products that have potential to bolster bilateral trade from India to Africa and vice versa. The Table 17.4 provides the example of 4 African countries which has been identiﬁed by CII for targeted trade promotion between India and Africa (CII 2022: 16). Conclusion Trade and investment linkages between India and Africa have witnessed an uptick in recent years, and are likely to grow even more, especially with growth opportunities expected following the operationalisation of the AfCFTA. Numerous opportunities exist for Indian companies to establish value chains and Regional Production Networks across various sectors like agriculture and food processing, healthcare, pharmaceuticals, ﬁnancing clean energy, digital technologies, exploring alternate solutions for infras- tructure ﬁnancing, increasing access to trade ﬁnance in Africa, among others. One of the long-term goals of Indian private and business enter- prises’ is to scale up India-Africa bilateral trade volume to US$ 200 billion

17 ANALYSING OPPORTUNITIES FOR INDIA IN AFRICA’S … 311 Table 17.4 Top African countries identiﬁed as per population and GDP and products with most potential to increase trade between India and Africa Country Population GDP India’s exports (US$ mn, 2021–2022) India’s imports (US$ mn, 2021–2022) India’s Top potential export to select African country African countries top potential exports to India South Africa 60.1 418 6085.29 10,965.81 Pharmaceutical products; Cereals; Vehicles other than railway or tramway; Ships and boats; Apparel and clothing; Miscellaneous Chemical products Mineral fuels and mineral oils; Ores, slag and ash; Machinery and mechanical appliances; Miscellaneous Chemical and Pharmaceutical products Egypt 102.6 402.8 3743.92 3520.83 Pharmaceutical products; Gems and Jewellery; Cotton; Iron and Steel Mineral fuels and mineral oils; Fertilisers; Pharmaceutical products; Inorganic and Organic chemicals (continued)

312 A. MISHRA Table 17.4(continued) Country Population GDP India’s exports (US$ mn, 2021–2022) India’s imports (US$ mn, 2021–2022) India’s Top potential export to select African country African countries top potential exports to India Ethiopia 99.7 99.3 681.28 62.44 Mineral fuels and mineral oils; Pharmaceutical products; Sugar; Electrical machinery and equipment; Iron and Steel Electrical machinery and equipment; Edible Vegetables and certain roots and tubers; Oil seeds; Miscellaneous grains; Residue and waste from food industry; Prepared animal fodder; Gems and Jewellery Algeria 45 164.6 703.25 1004.24 Pharmaceutical products; Mineral fuels and mineral oils; Medicaments; Iron and Steel Mineral fuels and mineral oils; Inorganic chemicals; Petroleum oil and oils obtained from bituminous minerals Source Compiled by author using data from Confederation of Indian Industry Report on “India Africa: Leveraging New Dimensions in Economic Engagement”

17 ANALYSING OPPORTUNITIES FOR INDIA IN AFRICA’S … 313 and investments to US$ 150 billion by 2030 (CII 2022: 7). Although this goal may be difﬁcult to achieve, it is not impossible. This chapter has discussed how India can employ certain strategies to leverage AfCFTA opportunities in trade by expanding exports to and imports from top African countries, based on their GDP size and population. India should also look to source more goods from other African economies and invest with the ultimate aim of exporting goods and products back to India. Ultimately for India, as this author has argued elsewhere, ‘the idea is to take the manufacturing base closer to African markets and come up with sub-regional and targeted strategies’, in accordance with African needs and priorities as envisaged in the Agenda 2063, so as to create products to serve local needs and generate employment. References 17th CII-EXIM Bank Conclave on India-Africa Growth Partnership: Creating Shared Futures. 2022, Jul 19–20. New Delhi. https://ciieximafricaconclave. com/. Afreximbank and EXIM India. 2018. Deepening South-South Collaboration: An Analyses of Africa and India’s Trade and Investment, Cairo: Egypt. https:// www.eximbankindia.in/Assets/Dynamic/PDF/Publication-Resources/Specia lPublications/Deepening-South-South-Collaboration_An-Analysis-of-Africa- and-Indias-Trade-and-Investment.pdf. African Development Bank Group. 2016, Mar. Jobs for Youth in Africa: Catalysing youth opportunity across Africa. https://www.afdb.org/ﬁlead min/uploads/afdb/Images/high_5s/Job_youth_Africa_Job_youth_Africa. pdf. African Development Bank Group. 2018. Africa’s Infrastructure: Great Potential But Little Impact on Inclusive Growth. Abidjan, Cote d’Ivoire. https://www. afdb.org/ﬁleadmin/uploads/afdb/Documents/Publications/2018AEO/Afr ican_Economic_Outlook_2018_-_EN_Chapter3.pdf. African Continental Free Trade Area: Questions & Answers. n.d. United Nations Economic Commission for Africa. https://repository.uneca.org/han dle/10855/43253. Beri, R. 2021, Mar 11. India’s Vaccine Maitri with Africa. Manohar Parrikar Institute for Defence Studies and Analyses. https://idsa.in/idsacomments/ind ias-vaccine-maitri-with-africa-rberi-110321. Chakrabarty, M. 2018, Feb. Indian investments in Africa: Scale, trends, and policy recommendations. Observer Research Foundation Occasional Paper No. 142. New Delhi. https://www.orfonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/ 02/ORF_OccasionalPaper_142_India_Africa.pdf.

314 A. MISHRA Confederation of Indian Industry. 2021, July 13. Plenary Session II: Aligning India-Africa bilateral trade with AfCFTA. https://www.youtube.com/ watch?v=KK6YpyRvQyk. Confederation of Indian Industry. 2022, Jul. India Africa: Leveraging New Dimensions in Economic Engagement. https://ciieximafricaconclave.com/Doc ument/Reports/India%20Africa%20Report%20for%20web.pdf. COVID-19 (Coronavirus) Drives Sub-Saharan Africa Towards First Recession in 25 Years. 2020, Apr 9.The World Bank. https://www.worldbank.org/en/ news/press-release/2020/04/09/covid-19-coronavirus-drives-sub-saharan- africa-toward-ﬁrst-recession-in-25-years. Delhi Declaration 2015, Third India-Africa Forum Summit, Partners in Progress: Towards a Dynamic and Transformative Development Agenda. 2015, Oct 29. Ministry of External Affairs, Government of India. http://www.mea.gov.in/ Uploads/PublicationDocs/25980_declaration.pdf. Export-Import Bank of India. 2022, Mar. Building a Resilient Africa: Enhanced Role of India, Working Paper No. 110. https://www.eximbankindia.in/Ass ets/Dynamic/PDF/Publication-Resources/ResearchPapers/OP/158ﬁle.pdf. Gicheru, K. B., Walker, T., and D. Reva. 2021, July 20. AfCFTA pros- perity requires more African seafarers, ships and ports. Institute for Secu- rity Studies. https://issafrica.org/iss-today/afcfta-prosperity-requires-more- african-seafarers-ships-and-ports. India’s Duty-Free Tariff Preference (DTPF) Scheme for Least Developed Countries (LDCs). 2017, Oct 9.Ministry of Commerce, Government of India. https://commerce.gov.in/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/MOC_636 434269763910839_international_tpp_DFTP .pdf. India-Mauritius CEPCA. 2021, Apr 1. Ministry of Commerce, Govern- ment of India. https://commerce.gov.in/international-trade/trade-agreem ents/india-mauritius-cecpa/. Maran Launches Focus: Africa Programme. 2022, Mar 31. Press Informa- tion Bureau, Government of India. https://archive.pib.gov.in/archive/releas es98/lyr2002/rmar2002/31032002/r310320021.html. Making the most of the African Continental Free Trade Area. 2022, Jun 30.The World Bank. https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/trade/publication/free- trade-deal-boosts-africa-economic-development#:~:text=The%20deal%20crea tes%20a%20continent,barriers%20to%20trade%20in%20services. Mazumdar, R. 2018, Aug 13. India remains an onlooker, as Chinese institutional equity ﬂoods Africa. Observer Research Foundation. https://www.orfonline. org/expert-speak/43292-india-remains-an-onlooker-as-chinese-institutional- equity-ﬂoods-africa/. MEA-TCIL sign pact to initiate Pan-African e-Network. 2018, Sept 11. Business Standard. https://mea.gov.in/Portal/ForeignRelation/Pan_African_e_docx_ for_xp.pdf.

17 ANALYSING OPPORTUNITIES FOR INDIA IN AFRICA’S … 315 SAGARMALA: Port-led prosperity. 2023. Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways, Government of India. https://sagarmala.gov.in/. Mishra, A. 2018, Oct 8. The African continental free trade area and its impli- cation for India-Africa trade. Observer Research Foundation, ORF Occasional Paper 171. https://www.orfonline.org/research/the-african-continental-free- trade-area-and-its-implications-for-india-africa-trade/#_edn51. Mumin, Z. H., and H.-J. Schramm. 2018, Jan 22. The impact of port infrastructure and logistics performance on economic growth: the mediating role on seaborne trade. Journal of Shipping and Trade, 3(1). https://jshippingandtrade.springeropen.com/articles/ https://doi.org/ 10.1186/s41072-018-0027-0. Onuah, F. 2022, Jan 25. Nigeria to amend oil law to extend petrol subsidies. Reuters. https://www.reuters.com/world/africa/nigeria-amend-oil-law-sus pend-removal-fuel-subsidies-2022-01-25/#:~:text=In%20November%2C% 20the%20government%20said,gross%20domestic%20product%20this%20year. Opening of India Africa Trade Council in India. 2021, Jan 22. Busi- ness Standard. https://www.business-standard.com/content/press-releases- ani/opening-of-india-africa-trade-council-in-india-121012200377_1.html. International Monetary Fund, Regional Economic Outlook. 2022, Oct. Sub- Saharan Africa: Living on the Edge. https://www.imf.org/en/Publicati ons/REO/SSA/Issues/2022/10/14/regional-economic-outlook-for-sub- saharan-africa-october-2022. Pan African e-Network Project (PAENP). 2013, Jan. Ministry of External Affairs, Government of India. https://mea.gov.in/Portal/ForeignRelation/ Pan_African_e_docx_for_xp.pdf. Signe, L. 2018, Mar 14. Capturing Africa’s high returns.Brookings. https://www. brookings.edu/opinions/capturing-africas-high-returns/#:~:text=Since%202 000%2C%20at%20least%20half,spending%20will%20total%20%246.7%20tril lion. Signe, L. 2020. Unlocking Africa’s Business Potential: Trends, Opportunities, Risks, and Strategies. Brookings Institution Press. State of AfCFTA ratiﬁcation. 2022, Oct 8.The Trade Law Centre (TRALAC). https://www.tralac.org/resources/infographic/13795-status-of-afcfta-ratiﬁ cation.html. Sudan again uniﬁes its currency exchange rate. 2022, Mar 8. Dabanga, https://www.dabangasudan.org/en/all-news/article/sudan-again-uniﬁes-its- currency-exchange-rate#:~:text=The%20Central%20Bank%20of%20Sudan% 20(CBoS)%20announced%20the%20unification%20of,to%20the%20parallel% 20market%20rate. United Nations Conference on Trade and Development. 2022, Jul 20. UNCTAD: Africa needs to rethink export diversiﬁcation to survive economic shocks. United Nations Africa Renewal. https://www.un.org/africarenewal/ magazine/july-2022/unctad-africa-needs-rethink%C2%A0export-diversiﬁcat ion-survive-economic-shocks.

316 A. MISHRA United Nations Conference on Trade and Development. 2021, Jan 1. AfCFTA support programme to eliminate non-tariff barriers, increase regulatory transparency and promote industrial diversiﬁcation. https://unctad.org/pro ject/afcfta-support-programme-eliminate-non-tariff-barriers-increase-regula tory-transparency-and.

CHAPTER 18 (Re) Positioning Myanmar in the India–China Congagement Politics Sampurna Goswami International Relations are centred on ‘interactions’. These ‘interactions’ broadly include cooperation, competition and conﬂict. Ever since, global politics has been deﬁned by ‘ﬂows’ rather than ‘spaces’, ‘interactions’ have taken courses beyond these three dominant types. Until the 1990s, nation-states emphasised military capabilities as a means to project power. Realists believed that international order is governed by anarchy and this constraint states from cooperating and compels them to calibrate mili- tary power to counter major threats. This ‘power’ interpretation of world order brought ‘geography’ into ‘politics’ more than ever before. This interpretation which is often termed as ‘geopolitics’—a strategy of coun- tering and containing through military might, continued to dominate IR for decades until the European Community came into existence. The idea of integration between nations placed adjacent to each other in a S. Goswami (B) Sukanta College, University of Calcutta, Kolkata, India e-mail: sg_plsc@sukantacollege.org © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapor e Pte Ltd. 2024 O. Mishra and S. Sen (eds.), Global Political Economy, Geopolitics and International Security , https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-97-2231-0_18 317

318 S. GOSWAMI contiguous geographical territory gave rise to a new discourse within IR— Regionalism. This discourse as advocated by the liberals did not reject the meta-geographical notions and interpretations of the world order. The advocates stressed the idea that anarchy as the dominant global order does not impede states’ willingness to cooperate. In fact, in situations of abso- lute anarchy, states cooperate and integrate into regions to maximise their absolute gains (Greico 1988: 485). Liberal Institutionalists further argued that states are less concerned about power and security but are more interested in maximising gains through integration. However, scholars of regional integration could not fully reject the idea that power play and balance of power strategies dominate a country’s foreign policy objec- tives and any cooperation or concerted initiative on the part of states as rational actors are deﬁned by power and security consideration (Greico 1988: 485–507). Geography and International Relations are intertwined with each other in such a way that even in the era of globalism, scholars tend to conﬁne themselves to the territorial analysis of global politics. This is inevitable because, even though nation-states desire to avoid conﬂict and contesta- tion, the scarcity of resources and a country’s quest to acquire power over other countries make conﬂict a ‘constant’ in the discourse of international relations. However, conﬂict need not, and is not always projected through violent wars. With the beginning of the Cold War and the emergence of regions, countries realised that wars were costly affairs. The drainage of wealth in wars far outweighs the advantages the warring countries acquire. Even the country that wins and gets placed in a higher position in the power hierarchy suffers from a mammoth economic crisis. With the end of the Cold War, therefore, the importance of military power is grad- ually waning. Moreover, the emergence of the United States (US) as a hegemonic power and the swell of US-led economic order augmenting through the International Monetary Fund and World Trade Organization pushed nation-states to adhere to foreign policies that necessarily opti- mised their economic interest. Edward N. Luttwak ( 1990: 17) argued that intersecting web of power relations was shrugging off the military defence and was taking up commerce and economic relations as a means to counter other nation-states (rivals mostly). According to Luttwak, the ‘grammar of commerce’ was replacing the ‘logic of conﬂict’. However, this grammar of commerce, as pointed out by Luttwak ( 1990: 17) ‘can at times be competitive and at times may end up in forming novel alliances,

18 (RE) POSITIONING MYANMAR IN THE INDIA–CHINA … 319 free trade areas and vertical integrations…[w]hich in turn would co- produce, co-develop and co-market goods and services but whatever be the result, all such commercial engagements would unfold with regards to frontiers’. Even though commercial relations result in a variable sum game unlike military conﬂicts that lead to zero-sum results, the statist notion of teasing out the greatest beneﬁt dominates. In other words, transnational economic transactions and engagements seem to promote all-pervasive development of the region but in reality, it maximises outcomes within the sovereign boundaries of one nation while minimising for the other. Thus, the grammar of commerce is just a veil that hides the ‘realpolitik’ interests of nation-states of outdoing each other. As put forth by Luttwak ( 1990: 18–19)—‘states act ‘Geoeconomically’ simply because of what they are: spatially deﬁned entities structured to outdo each other on the world scene’. Against this backdrop, therefore, it can be stated that the conven- tional ‘interactions’—cooperation, competition and conﬂict have taken courses where rivals are cooperating in certain areas while contesting in other sectors. This dualism in interaction is premised to reap the greatest beneﬁt. Rivals engage with each other only in those sectors where such engagement would result in a win–win situation and ﬁght in those where outmanoeuvring each other would result in a variable sum if not a zero-sum outcome. This kind of dual interaction is most palpable in regions. This is obvious because geoeconomics as a strategy of containing and countering through cooperation and engagement is applied mostly to integrations—regions or multilateral forums. This, however, is most visible in the Global South, where integration was adopted as the most viable approach to development. Most of the nation-states of the Global South adhered to the idea that opening backward areas to the forces of the market and connecting them to the comparatively developed areas (at times the economic centres and capitals) of the adjacent countries would generate dividends in the form of improvement of infrastructure, industrialisation, employment, improvement of trade relations, people-to- people connectivity and much more. However, primarily due to the highly competitive and interdependent global and national political environ- ment, integration is becoming more complex. As such, provinces within a particular nation are attempting to integrate with provinces of adja- cent nation-states, thereby creating several micro-regions within a broader region, all interacting to generate outcomes that add to development within and beyond the territorial borders of the participating sovereign

320 S. GOSWAMI nation-states. One such micro-region has been created by India’s North- east, Myanmar and China’s southwest. Mostly based on secondary data, we seek to delve deep into the India’s and China’s engagement with Myanmar. The ﬁrst part of the chapter tries to understand the cartography and how a micro-region is emerging around this geographical space. The second section of the chapter shall include three sub-sections. These sub- sections will brieﬂy deal with the sectors where both India and China have invested. These sub-sections will also try to tease out how India’s and China’s cooperation with Myanmar is culminating in contestation with each other. This section shall be followed by a conclusion to the chapter. India–Myanmar–China: T he Cartography South Asian politics is carved largely by ethnic conﬂicts, political confrontations, illegal immigration and insurgency. Besides these, the presence of China, and the ever present contestation and conﬂict between India and Pakistan have often posed a challenge to the overall regional setting. However, India along with her neighbours has engaged in several regional and sub-regional concerted initiatives, for instance, the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) or the Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC) with the agenda of promoting all-pervasive development and addressing the existing challenges through joint mechanisms. China’s presence in South Asia, however, is driven by two separate, but interre- lated objectives. One; to exact compliance from weaker nation-states of the South Asian Region to contain India and two; to expand its naval presence in the Indian Ocean to counter-hegemonic US and emerging India in the Indian Ocean Region. To make its presence overtly palpable, China has connected its Historical Silk Road with its newly conceived 21st-Century Maritime Silk Road—together termed as the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI). The BRI has also helped China to connect the two adjacent and overlapping regions—South Asia and the Indian Ocean. However, the Chinese attempt to invest in the infrastructural devel- opment of South Asian littorals, especially in ports, has also further encouraged New Delhi to ingress more deeply into the South Asian littoral countries through infrastructural and human resource develop- ment. This has given rise to what David Scott considers ‘The New Great Power Great Game of India and China’ (Scott 2008: 1–26).

18 (RE) POSITIONING MYANMAR IN THE INDIA–CHINA … 321 This ‘great game’, of late, has become more visible in micro-regions within South Asia and the Indian Ocean where both India and China are engaged to outrun each other. One such micro-region is centred on Myanmar. Since the 1990s, a new political cartography consisting of India’s Northeast, Myanmar and China’s Southwest has been emerging in Asia. Several factors are responsible for the emergence of this cartog- raphy— . First, Myanmar is equidistant to Delhi-Mumbai and Shanghai-Hong Kong. Furthermore, Myanmar is positioned right above the junc- ture of the Bay of Bengal, the Andaman Sea and the Indian Ocean. This geographical position of Myanmar has made the country immensely strategic as any transnational concerted initiative centred on Myanmar provides the participating nation-states (landlocked border provinces of India, China and Thailand) access to the Indian Ocean (Yhome 2014:2 – 3 ) . . Second, Myanmar’s isolation ensuing from more than ﬁfty years of military rule and a series of Western sanctions that have been imposed from time to time made it inevitable for the country to engage with its neighbours for economic and diplomatic support. This opened an avenue for both India and China—already engaged in the game of outrunning each other, to bolster their footprints in Myanmar through investments, soft loans and initiating cooperation in areas of connectivity and development. . Third, until 1989, India remained one of the launching pads from where pro-democracy student leaders of Myanmar organised campaigns. India provided ﬁnancial and logistic support to oppo- sition party leaders Aung San Syu Kyi and U Nu. New Delhi also provided intelligence support to the Kachin Independence Army and Karen National Union who were ﬁghting against the ruling mili- tary regime under Ne Win (Routray 2011: 299–301). New Delhi’s engagement with Myanmar’s military regime through the adoption of India’s ambitious Look East Policy in 1991 was driven by several factors; 1. China’s ingression into Myanmar. 2. India’s ambition to connect Northeast with Southeast Asian coun- tries through Myanmar.

322 S. GOSWAMI 3. New Delhi’s efforts to address the issues of illegal drug and arms trade. 4. To counter the insurgent outﬁts active along the India–Myanmar border. 5. To meet the rising demand of hydrocarbons by exploiting Myan- mar’s untapped natural reserves (Routray 2011: 312–317). . Fourth, China’s interest in Myanmar can be traced back to 1987, when Deng Xiaoping adhered to the policy of ‘reform and opening to the outside world’ also known as China’s ‘second revolution’ (Cheng and Zhang 1999: 91). The idea behind designing such a policy was premised on two important parameters, one; to preserve China’s independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity and two, to create a favourable international environment that is conducive to reforms, modernisation and opening up (China Balance Sheet 2020). Under this regime, integration with its neighbours to develop and modernise its landlocked south-western province of Yunnan became a priority. Furthermore, the end of the Cold War and the rise of the US, India’s growing inﬂuence in Myanmar, Myan- mar’s ASEAN membership, Beijing’s strategic concerns to access the Indian Ocean through Myanmar ports to bypass the Malacca choke- point, development of Yunnan and addressing the non-traditional security issues (narcotics, aids, etc.) were some of the other impor- tant driving forces behind China’s Myanmar policy (Steinberg and Fan, 2012: 155). The last two factors bring to the fore two conspicuous facets—one, the state-centric notion of security has been replaced by transnational ﬂows of contrabands, migrants, criminals, arms, diseases and environmental threats and therefore the ‘ﬂowmation of threat has itself blurred the borders’ (Ó Tuathail 1997: 49). This facet is quite evident in this partic- ular cartography and these issues have been one of the driving forces behind India’s and China’s policy vis-à-vis Myanmar. Two, both India and China crave to capture markets and escalate their economic advantages through state-led investment, transnational infrastructural development, cross-border facilitation of goods and services to exact greater proﬁts

18 (RE) POSITIONING MYANMAR IN THE INDIA–CHINA … 323 and augment relatively higher development within the nation-states rein- stating the spatiality, territory and border in their external relations with Myanmar. Therefore, India’s and China’s attempts to facilitate cross- border integration with Myanmar through de-territorialisation are, in reality culminating in re-territorialism. Th e I n d i a–China Interaction in Myanmar: Contested Cooperation? The existing literature that deals with all inter-state interactions surrounding this cartography has centred on the study at the bilateral level. Most of the literature is either about India-Myanmar or Myanmar– China relations. However, the nuances of this cartography lie in the simultaneous engagement of both India and China in Myanmar. The factors that drove India and China into Myanmar, as mentioned in the preceding section, highlight a pattern that is pertinent for both India and China—countering each other’s footprints and attempts to bolster their presence. Even though China entered Myanmar much earlier (1980), India being a late entrant (1990) has tried to make similar investments as undertaken by China. These investments will be dealt with brieﬂy in the succeeding sections. However, the great race between India and China that has ensued from the similarity in both the countries’ approach towards integration with Myanmar is unfolding a competitive engage- ment. Therefore, any analysis of the India-Myanmar or Myanmar-China relations at a bilateral level will only limit the understanding of this cartography as a whole. Furthermore, Myanmar, over the years, has become a theatre of geopo- litical competition and rivalry as several Asian economies are engaging in interaction, cooperative schemes and investments. These investments are aimed towards the promotion of growth and development of Myanmar but in doing so, the geoeconomic considerations are unfolding in a way that shows how these nation-states are trying to outdo each other in the country. Thus, to understand the actual pattern of interaction that surrounds this cartography, the notion of integration and region- alism must be considered as the theoretical premise. Indian and Chinese investments in Myanmar can be studied under three major heads— Connectivity, Sea Ports and Hydrocarbon and Development Cooperation.

324 S. GOSWAMI Connectivity The idea of connecting backward areas and provinces of a country with the economic growth centres (nodes and hubs) of the adjacent countries makes connectivity the ﬁrst and the preliminary step towards regional integration. In this particular cartography, ‘regionalism as a process’— where features of regionalism, for instance, cross-border connectivity, investment, infrastructure and trade, are deliberately undertaken (does not result from ‘spill over’) as a means to promote development. As a result, connectivity has been stressed by both India and China as the foremost step towards integration with Myanmar. India’s connectivity initiatives in Myanmar fall within the ambit of its Neighbourhood First Policy and the Act East Policy (earlier Look East Policy). Both these policies undertaken by New Delhi are targeted essentially towards consol- idating its re-integrationist foreign policy designed against the backdrop of China’s ambitious BRI, of which most of India’s neighbours are beneﬁciary (Summers 2019: 6). For India, connectivity deﬁned as “the cornerstone” of international cooperation is also a vital element for India’s own development, essentially at the intra-state level (Pant and Yhome 2020: 33–34). Off late, New Delhi is trying to create an “alternative infrastructural development model” (Pant and Yhome 2020, 37) based on shared prosperity through consultative, non-reciprocal and outcome- oriented foreign and integrationist policy” (Pulipaka et al., 2017: 12), for its neighbours at a time when there is a growing scepticism against China’s aggressive infrastructural initiatives. India’s two most ambitious connectivity projects in Myanmar include the India-Myanmar-Thailand Trilateral Highway and the Kaladan Multi- modal Transit Transport Project. Apart from these, there are several other proposed projects which include the Rhi-Tiddim Road, Stilwell Road, Chennai-Dawei Corridor and the Jiribam-Kalay Rail Link. The India– Myanmar–Thailand Trilateral Highway, conceived in 2005, is still under construction. The construction work of most of the road is completed and the roadway is operational in sections. The Kaladan Multimodal Transit Transport Project can be divided into three sub-sectors—the Sittwe Port, the inland waterway through the Kaladan River and the motorway connecting Paletwa in Myanmar to Zorinpui in India. This project is also under construction. However, India has completed the Sittwe Port and the inland waterway from Paletwa to Sittwe is operational (Shesadri 2014: 20). Other projects have been

18 (RE) POSITIONING MYANMAR IN THE INDIA–CHINA … 325 proposed but not much progress has been achieved yet. Two facets are to be considered here—one, India has been a late entrant in this sector. India has begun to invest in Myanmar’s connectivity sector only since 2005. Two, bureaucratic complexities and India’s failure to fast-track the projects in Myanmar have been responsible for the prolonged delay of these projects. China, on the contrary, entered the connectivity sector long back in 1980 with its sole cross-border connectivity project; the Irrawaddy Corridor. This corridor comprises three separate sectors—the Burma Road that connects Kunming in China with Mandalay in Myanmar, Inland Waterway along the Irrawaddy River that connects Bhamo in upper Irrawaddy with Minbu in the middle Irrawaddy and Railway connectivity proposed to connect Kunming with Kyaukphyu (Garver 2006: 1–22). Although most sections of this connectivity project are oper- ational, save the railway sector, China is facing signiﬁcant difﬁculties in the connectivity sector. China’s connectivity projects in Myanmar aim to provide Yunnan with an access to the Indian Ocean. This realpolitik interest has not been accepted widely by the population of Myanmar. Furthermore, Beijing’s attempts to revive suspended projects under BRI have made the subsequent ruling regimes (both civil and military) even more apprehensive about China’s aggressive ambitions. Besides these, the rising xenophobia amongst the population has compelled Naypyidaw to suspend most of the Chinese projects including several sections of the Irrawaddy Corridor. In spite of repeated attempts by Beijing to add most of its delayed or suspended connectivity projects under its ambi- tious China-Myanmar Economic Corridor (CMEC), the government in Naypyidaw has turned a deaf ear. However, Beijing has succeeded in concluding several MOUs during President Xi Jinping’s visit to Myanmar in 2020 and has been able to revive a few projects under its CMEC but this has only deepened Myanmar’s apprehensions about China’s debt trap diplomacy (Shesadri 2020). The India–China connectivity race that has unravelled in Myanmar since 2000 is bringing about variable gains for both India and China. Even though India entered late and has delayed the implementation and operationalisation of its projects, it enjoys a snug position vis-à-vis China. This is because of India’s welfare posture and benevolent approach that calls for all-pervasive development of both countries through cross-border connectivity. However, to what extent India can augment development in the Northeast, similar to what China has achieved in Yunnan, depends on

326 S. GOSWAMI New Delhi’s capability to operationalise the projects. However, besides the constant struggle to outdo each other in Myanmar, both India and China agreed to cooperate on a quadrilateral economic corridor involving Myanmar and Bangladesh in 1999. This quadrilateral connec- tivity venture termed the Kunming Initiative-Bangladesh, China, India, Myanmar-Economic Corridor (BCIM EC) failed in the face of India’s presentiments about China’s interests in the Northeast. Moreover, the forum called for an over-arching dominance and leadership of Beijing that was unacceptable to India (Uberoi 2014). These, coupled with the lack of clarity about the nature of the forum as to whether it is an Economic Corridor, or a Growth Quadrangle, the participating countries failed to reach any conclusive agreement. Seaports and Hydrocarbons Ever since economy became the frontiers of war and contestation— geographical advantage, strategic opportunities and corresponding mili- tary capabilities are measured in terms of a country’s maritime presence. Several nineteenth-century IR scholars including British naval strategist, Julian Corbett advocated that protection of Sea Lanes of Commu- nications(SLOCs) by actual physical destruction or capture of enemy warships, or through naval blockades is a strategy to weaken an enemy both at land and sea (Smith 2018). Against the backdrop of the contested and conﬂictual international politics of who gets what, when and how— sea power is not merely what happens at sea, it is more than that. It is about geopolitics, geoeconomic and geo-culture (Iliopoulas 2009:5 ) . For both India and China, the Indian Ocean remains one of the most strategic frontiers of expanding inﬂuence and bolstering naval capabilities. Almost 80% of India’s and China’s exports and imports (most importantly energy import) pass through the Indian Ocean. Thus, the protection of these SLOCs has, over the years, compelled both New Delhi and Beijing to proliferate their presence in this maritime domain. India’s reasser- tion into the Indian Ocean is driven mostly by China’s overt ingression into the theatres of naval and seaport diplomacy with the Indian Ocean littorals. For China, accessing the Indian Ocean through overseas port building is imperative because of the US presence in the Malacca Strait. Furthermore, the emergence of the Indo-Paciﬁc and US’ attempts to bring in other powers like Japan, India and Australia into the Indian Ocean through joint naval exercises has made China highly assertive.

18 (RE) POSITIONING MYANMAR IN THE INDIA–CHINA … 327 Myanmar’s maritime frontier along the junction of the Bay of Bengal, Andaman Sea and the Indian Ocean has provided immense opportunity for both its competing neighbours to outdo each other. India–China contestation in Myanmar’s rimland is palpable in three major sectors—seaport development, naval cooperation and hydrocarbon explo- ration. Both India and China have been able to build two grand seaports in the Rakhine province in Myanmar. India has built Sittwe (a part of the Kaladan Project) and China has built Kyaukphyu (part of a Special Economic Zone). The Kyaukphyu Deep Seaport and Special Economic Zone (SEZ) have been included under the CMEC as well. The SEZ includes two separate pipelines for oil and natural gas transportation from Kyaukphyu port to Kunming and an oil reﬁnery as well. Although India entered the hydrocarbon exploration sector in early 2000 it failed to import gas from Myanmar’s Shwe gas ﬁeld in the face of its inability to conclude an agreement with Bangladesh on an under- ground transnational gas pipeline. China, on the contrary, entered the sector in 2001 and was granted permission to explore natural gas four years later. China also won the bid to transport natural gas from Myan- mar’s Shwe ﬁelds directly through pipelines after India failed to transport the same. India’s failure provided Myanmar with an opportunity to sell the gas to China at greater proﬁt margins (Zhao 2008: 185). In the case of Naval Cooperation both India and China-made consid- erable inroads. However, India enjoys greater leverage vis-à-vis China. Since 1988 China has been the largest defence partner of Myanmar and has provided modern ﬁghter jets and naval ships including Hainan Class patrol vessels. China and Myanmar have also conducted joint naval exercises over the years, and more recently (2021) China transferred its old Ming-class diesel-electric submarine to Myanmar (Pandit 2021). However, China’s tacit association with the insurgent outﬁts in Myanmar, especially the Wa State Army and the poor quality of China-made artillery, encouraged Naypyidaw to consider India as a more trustworthy defence partner. India and Myanmar have successfully conducted joint naval exer- cises. The ﬁrst such Milan exercise was conducted in December 2005. India transferred BN-2 maritime MP aircraft, three HMS-X AMS sonar in 2013 and US$ 31 million worth of Shyena ASW torpedoes in 2017 (Peng 2019: 593). In October 2020, India gifted Myanmar 300 meters diesel-electric submarine INS Sindhuvir.

328 S. GOSWAMI Development Cooperation/Regionalism India and China have both proclaimed to cooperate in promoting a multi- lateral world order since 1955. At the Afro-Asian Bandung Conference in 1955, both India and China took the leadership in promoting an interna- tional order in which the rights and interests of the developing countries would be given sufﬁcient importance. Against this backdrop, both India (Middle Income Country) and China (Upper Middle Income Country) began to participate in development cooperation as an attempt to reduce the Global South’s dependence on the ﬁnances provided by the developed Global North (Chediek 2021: 3). Myanmar, a least-developed country and a country subjected to Western sanctions, provided an avenue for both India and China to make inroads into the theatre by providing development grants and assistance. However, India’s and China’s contri- bution in the development of Myanmar is more regional. According to Sloan (1971: 138–151), “nations which share common regional identity may be capable of helping one another to develop more rapidly than if a country pursued a solely nationalistic course”. India and China have often defended their Myanmar policy on the grounds of promoting all-pervasive development through cooperation and integration. Thus, development regionalism seems to be a better premise for understanding development- based integration in this cartography. Table 18.1 will provide a basic idea of the nature of investment and capital ﬂow that exists between India-Myanmar and Myanmar-China. The data provided in the table has been compiled by the author. Base data has been derived from several secondary sources. The competitive engagement of India and China is bringing in variable gains for both countries. None of the two Asian powers are net losers when measured in terms of the advantages accrued from integrating with Myanmar. China’s interest has been to provide Yunnan access to the Indian Ocean through the ports of Myanmar. China also aims to develop its landlocked south-western provinces through integration with neigh- bouring countries. To achieve that, China heavily invested in building border trade zones, special economic zones, cross-border connectivity, exploration of untapped natural resources of Myanmar, hydro-electric power projects and pipelines (oil and natural gas) that helped China to directly transport the oil imported from Persian Gulf countries through Myanmar. China has partially succeeded in achieving all of the above. However, ruling regimes in Myanmar have been compelled to adopt a

18 (RE) POSITIONING MYANMAR IN THE INDIA–CHINA … 329 Table 18.1 Sectoral cooperation in Myanmar: India–China compared Sectors India China Banking sector Several Indian Banks including Punjab National Bank, State Bank and Exim Bank are operational in Myanmar Several MOUs have been concluded between RBI and Central Bank of Myanmar Industrial and Commercial Bank of China has been helping in the development of Myanmar’s banking and ﬁnancial services. China Union Bank and Cooperative Bank (Myanmar) are developing UnionPay cards Telecommunication and digital connectivity Cross-border optic ﬁbre link between India and Myanmar was set up in 2009. It runs from Moreh to Mandalay. In December 2016, Bharti Airtel also set up an optical ﬁbre link China International Telecommunication Construction Company has been providing service in Myanmar since 2010. In 2014 China Unicom set up China-Myanmar International Terrestrial Cable System Power and Energy Supply Networks National Hydroelectric Power Cooperation India in collaboration with Department of Hydropower Implementation, Myanmar constructed the Tamanthi and Shewsayay Hydel Project, both were suspended in 2013 in the face of rising civil society movements Robust investment in Myanmar’s power sector China’s Southern Power Grid has built several dam across the Irrawaddy River. Chinese government has also connected the two countries through power grid China’s most ambitious hydel power project—the Myitsone Dam was however suspended by Myanmar Government in 2014 due to civilian unrest (continued)

330 S. GOSWAMI Table 18.1(continued) Sectors India China Agriculture and knowledge sector New Delhi assisted in setting up several institutions: Advanced centre for agricultural research and education Myanmar institute of information technology centre for development in advanced computing India–Myanmar centre for enhancement of information technology skills, Myanmar–India Entrepreneurship Development Centre, Myanmar-India Centre for English Language Training, Sanjay Gandhi Post-graduate Institute of Medical Sciences No Comprehensive Data Available. From 1980 to 2005, China-Myanmar signed ﬁfteen economic and technical cooperation agreements. Between 2004 and 2006 almost thirty agreements in the same sector were signed. The areas of cooperation include tourism, agriculture, trade, technology, ﬁsheries, automobiles, infrastructure Special economic zone and mining No investment China has made huge investments in: Kyaukphyu SEZ, Mandalay Economic and trade cooperation zone, Myotha Industrial Park. Several others have been proposed under BRI China’s Wanbao Mining Copper Limited made considerable investment in Letpadaung Coppermine in Sagaing Region. However, the project was Suspended due to civil unrest on the allegations of forced conﬁscation of land Reconstruction and Rehabilitation India has provided Myanmar ﬁnancial assistance during natural catastrophes, especially during cyclones and even during Covid. India also provided micro-development assistance for the development of border regions. India built fabricated houses for the rehabilitation of Rohingya In 2020, Myanmar and China signed 33 MOUs related to settlement of internally displaced people in Rakhine State Source Data compiled by Author

18 (RE) POSITIONING MYANMAR IN THE INDIA–CHINA … 331 hedging strategy against China since the 1980s. This is mainly because of China’s realpolitik ambition of developing Yunnan by exploiting the resources in Myanmar. Moreover, China maintained covert association with insurgent outﬁts of Myanmar and used them against the government in Naypyidaw whenever Myanmar tried for any sort of rapprochement with the US. Through such strategy, China indirectly interfered with Myanmar’s neutral foreign policy objective. Furthermore, Beijing recon- sidered most of the incomplete projects under its ambitious BRI that only resulted in exacerbating already existing anti-Chinese sentiments within the country. On the contrary, India’s approach and vision regarding its association and engagement with Myanmar have been benevolent and that of welfare. India’s ambitions behind its integration with Myanmar were also driven by its realpolitik interests of developing the Northeast, addressing the issue of insurgency and providing the landlocked Northeast access to ports in the Indian Ocean through Myanmar. Besides these, India also tried to inﬂuence the government in Myanmar in order to exact compliance against the aggression of China in the region and beyond. However, New Delhi never maintained any tacit association with any of the insurgent outﬁts in Myanmar since the 1990s and neither has it intervened in the domestic spheres of Myanmar, nor has India tried to achieve its objectives by exploiting the natural resources of Myanmar. This benevolent and trustworthy posture, in reality, provided India with greater leverage vis-à-vis China in this particular cartography. Myanmar, positioned in the centre of this competitive and contested engagement of both India and China, aims to accrue the largest share of develop- mental beneﬁts for itself. To achieve its interests, Myanmar, of late (before the February 1, 2021 coup), has begun to associate with other Asian economies including Japan, Singapore, Thailand, South Korea, Australia, the European Union and the US as well. Myanmar’s strategy of balancing India and China in a way that none can accrue absolute gains and achieve a position sufﬁcient to intervene in domestic policy-making has made this competitive engagement of India and China even stronger and discernible.

332 S. GOSWAMI Conclusion Integration, as a means to promote all-pervasive development of the cartography (India’s Northeast-Myanmar-China’s Southwest), carves the politics of India and China in Myanmar. Through such integration, however, both India and China aim to augment growth and development in their landlocked underdeveloped provinces of India’s Northeast and China’s Southwest. This integration with Myanmar is imperative for both the countries as the non-traditional security issues that have marred the India–Myanmar or the Myanmar-China border areas require joint efforts and cooperation at the political and security levels. Above all, integra- tion is unavoidable as both India and China crave to outmanoeuvre each other in several theatres of global politics. Geoeconomic being the new strategy of countering and containing, expanding inﬂuence and exacting compliance of weaker nation-states through ‘ﬂows’ (investments) provides immense opportunity for warring parties to secure and fulﬁl their national interest of calibrating power and outrunning their rival. Irrespective of the fact that India and China are engaging in several sectors in Myanmar (in the same sectors mostly), this cartography does not represent a region yet. However, the pattern of engagement, the approach and the outcome all represent characters of a region. The reason behind is that both India and China hesitate to cooperate with each other. Even though China tried to facilitate BCIM EC, India’s appre- hensions about Chinese interests and aggression in the Northeast have shut all possible avenues of cooperation. Nevertheless, studying India’s and China’s engagement with Myanmar as a bilateral association will only limit and narrow down the understanding of the cartography that repre- sents a micro-region as ‘power, market and community’ (Chatterjee 2007: 65–66). Therefore, a better terminology for this cartography would be a ‘micro-region under process’, where both India and China are engaging to contain each other and in the process trying to reap the greatest beneﬁt for themselves. Myanmar, on the contrary, is trying to balance both these contesting powers in a way that none can accrue absolute gains thereby steering the outcome of the ‘congagement’ as a variable sum for all three participating nation-states.

18 (RE) POSITIONING MYANMAR IN THE INDIA–CHINA … 333 References Chatterjee, S. 2007. Conception of space in India’s look east policy: Order, cooperation or Community? South Asian Survey 14(1): 65–81. Chediek, J. 2021. South-South cooperation and triangular cooperation to strengthen multilateralism. Development Cooperation Review 4 (2): 3–11. Cheng, J.Y., and F.W. Zhang. 1999. Chinese foreign relation strategies under Mao and Deng: A systematic and comparative analysis. Kasarinlan Philippine Journal of Third World Studies 14 (3): 91–114. Garver, J.W. 2006. Development of China’s overland transportation links with central, South-west and South Asia. The China Quarterly 185: 1–22. Greico, J.M. 1988. Anarchy and limits of cooperation: A realist critique of the newest liberal institutionalism. International Organisation 42 (3): 485–507. Iliopoulas, I. 2009. Strategy and geopolitics of sea throughout history”. Baltic Security and Defence Review 11 (2): 5–20. Luttwak, E.N. 1990. From geopolitics to geoeconomic: Logic of conﬂict, grammar of commerce. The National Interest 2: 17–23. Ó Tuathail, G. 1997. At the end of geopolitics? Reﬂections on a plural prob- lematic at the century’s End, Alternatives: Global, Local, Political 22(1): 35–55. Pandit, R. 2021, December 28. China Woos Myanmar with Old Sub. The Times of India. https://timesoﬁndia.indiatimes.com/world/rest-of-world/ china-woos-myanmar-with-old-sub/articleshow/88534706.com Pant, H., and K. Yhome. 2020. India’s sub-regional connectivity initiatives: Re- imagining the neighbourhood, India Review 19 (1), 33–51. Peng, N. 2019. Budding Indo-Myanmar relations: Rising but limited challenges for China. Asian Affairs 50 (4): 588–601. Pulipaka, S.,Ghoshal, S., Antara., and S. Sircar. 2017. India’s Connectivity Frameworks. New Delhi: Delhi Policy Group. Shesadri, V. S. 2014. Transforming connectivity corridors between India and Myanmar in development corridors. Research and Information System (RIS) Report. Trans Report.pdf (ris.org.in). Shesadri, V.S. 2020. China rises further in Myanmar. Delhi Policy Group Policy Brief, 5(3). China Rises Further in Myanmar (delhipolicygroup.org). Smith, J.W.E. 2018, August 21. Corbett’s relevance to modern strategic thinking. The Strategy Bridge. https://thestrategybridge.org/the-bridge/ 2018/8/21/corbetts-relevance-to-the-modern-strategic-thinker Summers, T. 2019. The belt and road initiative in Southwest China: Responses from Yunnan province. The Paciﬁc Review 34 (2): 206–229. Steinberg, D.I., and H. Fan. 2012. Modern China-Myanmar relation: Dilemmas of mutual dependence. Nias Press. Uberoi, P . 2014. BCIM economic corridor: A leap into unknown? ICS Working Paper . Institute of Chinese Studies. No. 14.pdf (icsin.org).

334 S. GOSWAMI Yhome, K. 2014. Myanmar and the geopolitics of the bay of Bengal. ORF Issue Brief . ORF_Issue brief_68_K. Yhome (orfonline.org). Zhao, H. 2008. China and India: Competing for good relations with Myanmar. The Journal of East Asian Affairs 22 (1): 175–194.

Index 0–9 1907 Hague IV Conventions, 130 1949 Geneva Conventions, 130 1951 Refugee Convention, 199, 206 1977 Additional Protocols I, 136 1977 Additional Protocols II, 136 21st Century Maritime Silk Road, 249, 263, 320 21st-century war, 122 A Accra, 305 Act East Policy, 324 Adaptative authoritarianism, 239 Additional Protocol I, 130 Additional Protocol II, 131 Additional Protocols of 1977, 142 Afghanistan, 3, 222 Afghan refugees, 206 Af-Pak region, 25 Africa, 2, 121, 136, 180 exports to India, 310 Africa Eastern, 77 African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA), 294, 301 African Development Bank Group (AfDB), 293 African energy, 139 African Union (AU), 305 Africa Southern, 77 Afro-Asian Bandung Conference, 328 Agenda 2063, 313 Air Defence Identiﬁcation Zone (ADIZ), 253 al-Assad, Bashar, 107, 135 Allied Democratic Forces (ADF), 94 Al-Shabab, 220 Al-Sisi, 162 Alternative trade routes, 119 American Dream, 257 American rebalancing, 253 American security umbrella, 125 Andaman Sea, 327 Angola, 95 Annan, Koﬁ, 193 © The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2024 O. Mishra and S. Sen (eds.), Global Political Economy, Geopolitics and International Security, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-97-2231-0 335

336 INDEX Anti-balaka, 98 Anti-geopolitics, 27, 28 counter-narratives of, 29 Apartheid South Africa, 151 Arab Spring, 161 Area of Freedom, Security, and Justice, 200 Armed conﬂict, 130, 197, 209 Armed Non-State Actors (ANSAs), 217 Armenia, 3, 103 Arms embargo, 159 Article 2(7), 221 Article 41 of the UN Charter, 149 Article 47 of Protocol I, 136 ASEAN Consensus, 259 ASEAN Mekong Basin Development Cooperation (AMBDC), 261 ASEAN plus, 259 ASEAN Plus Three, 258 ASEAN Regional Forum, 253 ASEAN’s Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea (DOC), 246 Asia Africa Growth Corridor (AAGC), 305 Asian-African Conference, 63 Asian civilisations, 275 Asian Development Bank (ADB), 260, 261 Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB), 119, 124 Asia-Paciﬁc, 4, 277 Asia-Paciﬁc Economic Cooperation Forum (APEC), 277 Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), 244, 258, 259, 284, 288, 322 Asylum seekers, 204 Asymmetrical interdependence, 56 Asymmetric War, 60, 93 AUKUS, 5 Aung San Syu Kyi, 321 Australia, 326 Authoritarianism, 3, 160 Autonomous weapons, 142 Ayeyawady-Chao Phraya-Mekong Economic Cooperation Strategy (ACMECS), 262 Azerbaijan, 3, 103, 104, 106 B Balance of power, 39, 254, 281, 282, 318 Balance of threat, 285 Bali Trade Facilitation Agreement, 304 Balkans, 2 Baltic, 77 Banco Delta Asia (BDA), 158 Bangladesh, 222, 326, 327 Bank of Baroda, 304 Baracuhy, Braz, 57, 59 Baseload capacity generator, 175 Bay of Bengal, 253, 283, 327 Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC), 4, 320 Beijing Consensus, 258 Belarus, 177 Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), 5, 93, 119, 121, 235, 248, 259, 270, 283, 320, 324 Biden, Joe, 105, 138 Bin-Laden, Osama, 221 Birla Group, 306 Black Sea port, 118 Blackwill, R.D., 56 Boko Haram, 97 Border disputes, 276 Bozize, Francois, 98 Brazil, 4, 63

INDEX 337 Bretton Woods Institutions, 5 Brexit, 6, 7 BRICS, 4, 56, 63, 67, 100, 269 British Somaliland, 96 Brussels Effect, 258 Buhari, Muhammadu, 98 Burma Road, 325 C Cambodia, 222, 259, 260 Caribbean, 77 Caspian energy projects, 104 Caspian Pipeline Consortium, 177 Central African Republic (CAR), 98 Central and East European 17+1 Forum, 265 Central Asia, 100, 104, 276 Central Europe, 77 Central Military Commission, 234 Chad, 97 Chennai-Dawei Corridor, 324 Chiang Mai Initiative, 258 Chile, 151 China, 3, 40, 103, 116, 117, 121–124, 137, 139, 180, 185, 186, 260, 320 collapse, 229 foreign policy, 228, 230 global exports, 296 global strategy, 230 Myanmar policy, 322 Southwest, 320, 332 threat, 229 China-Arab States Cooperation Forum, 265 China-Central Asia Industrial and Investment Cooperation Forum, 265 China Dream, 252, 254, 269 China-Laos Railway Project, 252 China-Myanmar Economic Corridor (CMEC), 325 China-Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC), 266, 267 China-U.S. rivalry, 236 Chinese Dream, 25, 228, 231 Chinese foreign policy, 269, 270 Chinese PLA-N, 246 Chinese revanchism, 7 Chittagong, 283 CII-EXIM Bank Conclave on India-Africa Growth Partnership, 299 CII-EXIM Bank Conclave on India-Africa Project Partnership, 303 Civil war, 85 Clandestine migratory routes, 201 Clash of civilizations, 25, 26 Classical geopolitics, 8 Classical Realism, 232 Clean energy, 172, 185 commitments, 182 transition, 172, 181, 183, 186–188 Climate change, 9, 27, 60, 61, 115, 124, 132, 172, 181, 187 Climate Change agenda, 186 Climate fund, 185 CLV Triangle Development, 262 Coalition of the Willing, 124 Coercive sanctions, 152 Cold War, 2, 8, 25, 30, 113, 114, 116, 122, 124, 130, 131, 135, 138, 148, 154, 210, 244, 258, 279, 318, 322 Commission on Human Security, 193 Common Article 3 of 1949 Geneva Conventions, 131, 211, 222 Common Foreign and Security Policy, 162 Common security, 192 Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), 3 Competitive engagement, 323

338 INDEX Competitive regulatory protectionism, 42 Complex humanitarian emergency (CHE), 4, 209, 211, 212, 222 international management of, 223 Complex interdependence, 4, 8, 58 Complexity theory, 5 Comprehensive Economic Cooperation and Partnership Agreement (CECPA), 308 Comprehensive national power, 230 Comprehensive National Security, 270 Comprehensive sanctions, 160 Comprehensive security, 269 Confederation of Indian Industries (CII), 299 Conﬁdence building measures, 280 Conﬂict dynamics, 280 Confucius Institutes, 253, 266 Congagement, 332 Continentalism, 275 Conventional geopolitical narratives, 27 Cooperative security, 288 Council of the European Union, 163 Counter-hegemonic geopolitical narratives, 31 Counter-narratives, 27 COVID-19 pandemic, 7, 27, 36, 45, 47, 50, 62, 69, 114, 118, 119, 125, 134, 180, 181, 200, 204, 236, 291, 295 Creating Shared Futures, 299 Crimea, 4, 136 Criminalisation, 160, 164 Critical geopolitics, 27 Critical minerals supplies, 186 Cross-border connectivity, 324, 328 Cross-border integration, 323 Cross-border irregular migration, 206 Cuba, 73 Customary international law, 131 Cyber warfare, 93, 132 Czech Republic, 72, 140 D Debt-trap diplomacy, 93, 235 Debt-trap(s), 26, 64, 247, 254, 325 Defence budgets, 135 De-globalisation, 49 Demobilisation, disarmament, and reintegration (DDR), 198 Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (DPRK), 156 Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), 94, 186 Deng, Francis M., 217 Deng Xiaoping, 244, 275, 322 Deportation, 204 Desirable migrants, 201 Detention camps, 204 Development aid, 55 Development cooperation, 309, 328 Development regionalism, 328 Difference GMM (DGMM) model, 83 Displacement, 140, 194 Doha Rounds, 258 Doklam, 237 Drug trafﬁcking, 159 Duterte, Rodrigo, 250 Duty-Free Tariff Preference Scheme (DFTP), 293 Duty-Free Tariff Preference Scheme for Least Developed Countries (DFTP-LDC), 301 E Early Warning Centres, 284 East Asia, 77, 264, 282 East Asian Regionalism, 258 East Asian Summit, 258 East China Sea, 253, 278

INDEX 339 East Coast Rail Link, 250 Eastern bloc, 2 Eastern Europe, 3 East Pakistan, 222 East-West Corridor, 262 East-West Economic Corridor (EWEC), 260 Economic growth, 75 Economic interdependence, 58 Economic liberalism, 57 Economic nationalism, 41 Economic sanctions, 73, 149 Economic slowdown, 240, 281 Economic stagﬂation, 74 Economic tools, 93 Egypt, 96, 156, 310 Emergency Relief Coordinator (ERC), 212 Emerging countries, 124 Emerging economies, 118, 119, 227 Emerging powers, 56, 125 End of history, 25 Energy geopolitics, 172 Energy infrastructure, 177 Energy insecurity, 178 Energy security, 171, 177, 188, 286 Energy security narrative, 180 Energy superpower, 176, 180 Equitable multilateralism, 63 Ethiopia, 306 Eurasia, 264, 276 Eurasia Economic Union, 100 Euro-Atlantic, 277 Europe, 123, 124 European Commission, 139 European security architecture, 134 European Union (EU), 3, 103, 122, 123, 125, 130, 132, 135, 157, 200 General Court, 162 member states, 201 sanctions, 163 Strategy for Cooperation in the Indo-Paciﬁc, 123 system, 200 Exchange rate, 74 Exercise Malabar, 283 Exogeneity assumption, 83 Export basket, 309 Export Import (EXIM) Bank, 297 of China, 248 of India, 298, 299 Export Specialization Index (ES Index), 310 Externalisation, 200, 201 F Fidel Castro, 151 Finland, 132 Fixed effect models, 83 Fixed Effects (FE) panel regression, 81 Forced displacement, 3 Forced migration, 27 Foreign Direct Investment (FDI), 293, 308 Fortress economy, 3 Fossil fuel(s), 172, 182 consumption, 182 economy, 184 prices of, 183 resources, 185 return to, 182 Fragile societies, 133 France, 132 Free Trade Agreements (FTAs), 100, 258 Frontex, 200 G G20, 4, 185 G5 forces (Burkina Faso, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, and Chad), 96

340 INDEX Galeotti, Mark, 58, 62 Galwan valley, 237 Gandhi, Rajiv, 276 Gaza, 100 Gaza War, 100, 142 Gemeinschaft, 37 General Assembly, 61 Generalized Method of Moments (GMM), 83 Geneva Conventions of 1949, 130, 136, 142 Geo-cultural, 22 Geoeconomic(s), 8, 22, 26, 36, 44, 49, 50, 55, 56, 59, 93, 97, 105, 107, 115, 148, 173, 259, 271, 319, 323, 326, 332 calculations, 271 interests, 264 strategies, 26, 67, 271 tactics, 62, 64 tools, 56, 63 Geographical determinism, 23 Geopolitical, 5, 22, 49, 93, 100, 115, 118, 121, 129, 141, 152, 237, 287, 289 calculations, 179 competition, 323 conceptions, 276 constructs, 22, 26, 29, 33 crisis, 70, 118 dividends, 268, 271 dynamics, 288 environment, 32 goals, 259 interests, 104, 264 manoeuvrings, 259 narratives, 22, 24, 27, 29, 30, 33 objectives, 192, 259 rivalries, 37 strategies, 50, 70, 275 tension, 276 threats, 125 weapon, 140 Geopolitics, 5, 8, 22, 23, 30, 36, 44, 50, 56, 94, 139, 173, 259, 271, 276, 317, 326 of energy, 171, 183 Geopolitics from below, 27 Geostrategic discourses, 277 Geostrategy, 22, 59, 60, 271 Germany, 132, 140 Gesellschaft, 37 GHG emissions, 185 Gini index, 76, 77, 85 Global economic order, 119 Global energy landscape, 185 Global energy security, 172 Global ﬁnancial crisis, 4, 173 Global governance, 61 Global greenhouse gases, 182 Global hegemon, 237 Globalisation, 41, 43, 113, 276, 279 Global liberal economic order, 57 Global North, 4, 63, 64, 181, 328 Global pandemic, 143 Global player, 281 Global political economy, 5 Global politics, 114, 124, 318 Global power, 121 Global refugee crises, 4 Global responsibility, 125 Global South, 4, 60, 63, 64, 67, 181, 183–185, 187, 188, 319, 328 liberalism in, 65 Global supply chains, 9, 26, 117 Global value chains (GVCs), 72, 302 GMS subregion, 271 Goïta, Assimi, 96 Grand geopolitical narratives, 33 Greater Mekong Sub-region, 259, 260 Great game, 321 Great Inﬂuenza epidemic, 70 Green energy transition, 180, 182

INDEX 341 Grey Zone Warfare, 60 Group of 77, 63 Growth Quadrangle, 326 Guangxi, 259 Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement, 217 Guizhou, 278 Gulf of Aden, 286 Gulf Pearl Chain, 264 Gulf States, 57 Gwadar, 283 H Hamas, 100, 141 Hambantota Port, 235, 266, 283 Heartland, 276 Heavily indebted poor countries (HIPC), 77 Hedging strategy, 250, 331 Heteroscedasticity, 83 High-politics, 55 Hong Kong, 105, 158 Horn of Africa, 278, 286 Hu Jintao, 229, 230, 234, 269 Human development index, 60 Human Development Report: New Dimensions of Human Security, 192 Humanitarian assistance, 46, 116, 122, 157 Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief (HADR), 284 Humanitarian crisis, 130 Humanitarian disaster, 139 Humanitarian emergency, 210 Humanitarianism, 214 Humanitarian operations, 133 Humanitarian organisations, 220, 221 Human rights, 68, 152 Human security, 191 Human trafﬁcking, 159, 197, 201, 202 Hybrid War, 60 Hybrid warfare, 59 Hydrocarbon, 323 Hydrocarbon exploration, 327 Hydro-electric dam, 251 Hydro-electricity, 252 Hyper-globalisation, 44 I Identity-driven politics, 42 Identity politics, 50 Illegal gold mining, 159 Illegal migrants, 205 Illicit trading routes, 157 Illicit transportation, of asylum seekers, 203 Immigration, 43 Import substitution, 279 Independent Commission on Disarmament and Security Issues, 192 India, 63, 117, 119–121, 320 approach towards Indo-Paciﬁc, 123 Northeast, 320, 325, 331, 332 India–Africa trade and economic relations, 298 I2U2 (India-Israel-US-UAE), 99 India–Myanmar, 328, 332 India–Myanmar–Thailand Trilateral Highway, 324 India-Africa bilateral trade, 302, 310 India-Africa Forum Summit (IAFS), 304 India Africa Trade Council, 305 India-Mauritius CEPCA, 308 India-Myanmar-Thailand Trilateral Highway, 324 Indian investment in Africa, 302 Indian Navy, 253 Indian Ocean, 121, 277, 286, 287, 320, 326

342 INDEX Indian Ocean Region (IOR), 121 Indian Ocean strategy, 122 Indian private sector, 303, 305 Indo-China, 260, 262 Indonesia, 119, 185 Indo-Paciﬁc, 4, 25, 114, 115, 120–125, 237, 253, 277, 279, 281, 285, 288, 289, 326 maritime area, 123 strategy, 122 Indo Paciﬁc Ocean’s Initiative (IPOI), 287 Informalisation, 160, 164 Inter-Agency Standing Committee (ISAC), 215 Interconnectedness, 113, 114, 119, 122, 123, 279 Interconnected world, 70, 140 Interdependence, 56, 58, 115, 117, 148, 175, 176 Interdependent world, 154 Intermestic, 44 Internally displaced persons (IDPs), 198, 206, 212, 216 International armed conﬂict (IAC), 130, 131, 133, 141 International Climate Finance, 183 International Commission on Intervention and State Sovereignty (ICISS), 219 International Court of Justice (ICJ), 246 International Energy Agency, 182 International energy architecture, 186 International ﬁnance fund, 184 International humanitarian law (IHL), 130, 133, 143, 217 International humanitarian regime, 213, 225 International human rights, 223 International human rights laws (IHRL), 217 International intervention, 160 Internationalisation of crisis management, 216 of humanitarian emergencies, 216 International law, 23, 116, 136 International migration, 196, 199, 207 International Monetary Fund (IMF), 62, 236, 248, 318 International Organization for Migration (IOM), 196 International Red Cross Committee (ICRC), 133, 210, 221 International Red Cross Society, 210 International refugee law, 199 International sanctions, 155 International security, 97, 106 International terrorist organisations, 131 Inter-state wars, 132 Intra-African trade, 302 Iran, 4, 40, 73, 100, 103, 124, 135, 137, 151, 174, 178, 179, 206 nuclear weapons programme, 56 Iranian oil embargo, 174 Iraq, 222 Irrawaddy Corridor, 325 Irregular cross-border migration, 194 Irregular migrants, 195, 199 Irregular migration, 201, 202, 205, 206 Irregular warfare, 7 ISEAS-YusofIshak Institute, 243 Islamic State West Africa Province (ISWAP), 98 Island countries, 122 Island nations, 121 Island states, 60, 61 Israel, 100, 141 war in Gaza, 141 Israel-Hamas irregular warfare, 3 Israel-Palestine conﬂict, 141

INDEX 343 Isthmus Kra, 253 IUU ﬁshing, 61 J Jaffna, 214 Jaishankar, S., 103 Japan, 278, 283, 326 Jiabao, Wen, 158, 230 Jiang Zemin, 234 Jiribam-Kalay Rail Link, 324 Johannesburg Summit, 67 Johnson, Boris, 132 Juan Guaidó, 164 Just Energy Transition Partnerships, 185 K Kachin Independence Army, 321 Kagame, Paul, 94 Kaladan Multimodal Transit Transport Project, 324 Kaldor, Mary, 131 Karakoram Highway, 283 Karen National Union, 321 KARMA Loop, 22, 33, 34 Kazakhstan, 104, 177 Kennan, George, 101 Kiir, Salva, 95 Kim Jong-un, 156, 158 Kindleberger Trap, 268 Kleptocracy, 163 Kosovo, 222 Kunming, 325 Kunming Initiative-Bangladesh, China, India, Myanmar-Economic Corridor (BCIM EC), 326, 332 Kyaukphyu, 283, 327 Kyaukphyu Deep Seaport, 327 Kyiv, 137 L Ladakh, 234 Landlocked African countries, 304 Land power, 276 Laos, 248, 259, 260 Latin America, 4, 77 Lavrov, Sergey, 237 Lebanon, 3 Le Keqiang, 249 Lenin, Vladimir, 142 Liberal democracy, 2, 68 Liberal democratic order, 117 Liberal democratic political order, 116 Liberal economic order, 64 Liberal Institutionalists, 318 Liberal international order (LIO), 3, 5, 41, 43, 50, 65–67, 183 demise of, 43 Liberal international project, 43 Liberal international system, 115 Liberalisation, 113 Liberal order, 124 Liberal world order, 125 Libya, 222 Linklater, Andrew, 59 Li Qiang, 238 Logic of conﬂict, 318 Logic of control, 36 Logic of exceptionalism, 36, 45 Logic of order, 36 Look East Policy, 321 Low-Intensity Conﬂicts (LICs), 212 Low-politics, 55 Lukashenka, Aliaksandr, 135 Luttwak, Edward, 56 M M23, 95 Macclesﬁeld Bank, 245 Machar, Riek, 95 Maduro government, 159

344 INDEX Maduro, Nicolas, 159 Mahamat, 97 Mahan, Alfred, 178 Mainland China, 105 Make in India, 119 Malabar joint naval exercises, 253 Malacca chokepoint, 322 Malaysia, 262 Maldives, 122 Mali, 96 Mamallapuram, 238 Marcos, Ferdinand, 250 Maritime connectivity, 284, 285 Maritime disputes, 288 Maritime policy, 121 Maritime security dialogue, 280 Maritime silk route, 248 Maritime strategy, 276, 280 Maritime transport infrastructure, 304 Marshall Plan, 60 Mass human displacement, 210 Mass irregular migration, 203 Mauritius, 308 Mearsheimer, J.J., 178 Mediterranean Sea, 249 Medvedchuk, 101 Mekong Basin, 259 Mekong Delta, 251 Mekong River, 251 Micro-region, 320, 321, 332 Middle East, 2, 100 Middle East and North Africa (MENA), 77, 161 Middle Kingdom, 263 Migrant smuggling, 196, 197, 203 Migrant trafﬁcking, 196 Migration, 115 Migration-security nexus, 195 Migratory ﬂows, 194 Milan, 327 Militarisation, 74, 87 Military alliance, 117 Military capabilities, 317 Military expenditure, 71, 75, 79, 84, 87 as percentage of GDP, 80, 81, 84 per capita GDP growth on, 88 Mineral rent, 76, 79 Mischief Reef, 246 Mixed motivations, 194 Modern Realism, 232 Modi, Narendra, 283, 284 Mombasa, 305 Morowali Industrial Park (IMIP), 251 Mozambique, 139 Mubarak, Hosni, 161 Multialignment policy, 286 Multilateral, 121, 125, 152, 277 institutions, 75, 113, 120 world order, 328 Multilateralism, 4, 49, 61, 115, 235, 270, 285, 288 Multinational sanctions, 153, 155, 161, 163, 164 Multipolarity, 154 Multipolar world, 124, 135, 155 Myanmar, 214, 259, 278, 320 Myanmar-China, 328, 332 Myanmar-China crude oil pipeline, 249 Myanmar-China Pipeline Watch Committee, 249 Myitsone Dam, 247 N Nagorno-Karabakh, 3, 103, 106 Nagorno-Karabakh conﬂict, 104 Namibia, 186 National Development and Reform Commission, 263, 267 National security dilemma, 181 Natural resources, 74, 94 Nature of warfare, 141, 143

INDEX 345 Naval blockade, 287 Naval Cooperation, 327 Naval modernisation, 279 Naypyidaw, 247, 325, 331 Neighbourhood First Policy, 122, 324 Neoclassical realism, 233 Neoclassical realists, 232 Neoclassical theory, of Realism, 233 Neoliberal economics, 42, 50, 257, 271 Neoliberal economy, 258 Neoliberalism, 42 Neoliberal order, 257 Neorealists, 232 New Asian Regionalism, 258 New Development Bank, 64, 67, 269 New energy architecture, 183, 185, 187 New energy economy, 186 New era, 232 Ne Win, 321 New International Economic Order (NIEO), 63 New Regional Economic Order (NREO), 258 New Silk Road, 235 Niger, 97 Nigeria, 95, 97, 139, 297, 310 Non-Aligned Movement, 63 Non-international armed conﬂict, 3, 130, 141, 142 Non-Linear Warfare, 60 Non-proliferation sanctions, 164 Non-refoulement, 200 Non-tariff barriers, 310 Non-traditional challenges, 113 Non-traditional maritime threats, 121 Non-traditional political security threats, 124 Non-traditional security, 194 Non-traditional security issues, 322, 332 Non-western perspective, 259 Nord Stream, 101 Nord Stream 1&2, 102 Nord Stream pipeline, 177 North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), 3, 60, 75, 101, 104, 130, 132, 135, 176, 222 Northeast, 332 North-East Asia, 277 North Korea, 4, 40, 73, 124, 137, 151, 155 WMD programme, 157 North-South Economic Corridor (NSEC), 260 Novorossiysk, 104 Nuclear Armageddon, 138 Nuclear energy, 62, 185 Nuclearisation, 164 Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty (NPT), 156 Nuclear proliferation, 4, 73 Nuclear weapons, 62 Nuozhadu Dam, 252 O Obama, Barack, 283 Oceania, 277 Ofﬁce of the Emergency Relief Coordinator (ERC), 215 Oil net exporter of, 180 prices, 141 rent, 76, 160 spills, 61 One Belt One Road (OBOR), 235, 263 Open-source intelligence (OSINT), 138 Orban, Viktor, 132 Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), 77

346 INDEX Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), 175, 186 P Paciﬁc, 77 Paciﬁc Ocean, 277 Pakistan, 116, 117, 206, 320 Pakistan energy corridor, 264 Pakistani Red Crescent Societies, 221 Palme, Olof, 192 Pan-African e-Network project (PAeNP), 292 Paracels, 245 PASSEX Naval exercises, 253 Peaceful development, 228 Peaceful rise, 228 Peaceful rise theory, 229, 230 Peacekeeping Operations, 215 Pelosi, Nancy, 238 People’s Liberation Army (PLA), 234 overseas deployment of, 99 People’s Liberation Army Navy (PLA-N), 121 People’s Republic of China (PRC), 122 Per capita GDP, 84 Permacrisis, 2, 6, 7, 30, 33, 58–60, 62, 65, 114, 115, 124, 125, 147, 163, 171, 180, 206 Persian Gulf, 249, 328 Petrostates, 178, 185, 186 Piraeus port project (Greece), 236 Pisang Island, 245 Pivot to Asia, 60, 282, 286 Podda Setu, 266 Pokhara Airport, 266 Poland, 72, 140 Politburo Standing Committee, 233 Political settlement of sanctions, 163 Politics of identity, 42 Pol Pot regime, 222 Polycrisis, 6, 30, 33 Populism, 43, 50 Post-American world order, 4 Post-Cold War, 2, 4, 8 era, 5, 150 international order, 150 international system, 56 Post-truth, 30 POWERCHINA, 252 POWs, 133 Pratas Island, 245 Predetermined regressors, 83 Presidential palaces case, 162 PRIO Conﬂict Recurrence Database, 76 Private military companies (PMCs), 136 Private military contractors (PMCs), 9 Project Mausam, 285 Protectionist economic policies, 43 Protectionist policies, 44 Protracted Refuge Situations (PRS), 206 P u l a uB a t uP u t e h , 245 Putin, Vladimir, 103, 132, 139, 176 Q Qiang guo, 231, 234 Quad, 237, 253, 283 Quadrilateral economic corridor, 326 Quadrilateral Security Dialogue (QUAD), 5, 122, 237 R Raisi, Ebrahim, 99 Rajya Sabha, 103 Rakhine, 214, 327 Rare earth minerals, 185 Rare earths, 186 Realist theory, 61

INDEX 347 Red Sea, 95 Refugee crisis, 140 Refugees, 198, 206 Regime change, 160, 164, 165 Regime survival, 158 Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP), 258 Regional integration, 318 Regionalism, 258, 269, 318, 323 Regional powers, 124 Regional Production Networks (RPNs), 309, 310 Regulations on Rare Earths Management (2021), 186 Regulatory protectionism, 50 Renewable energy, 138, 184–186 Renewables, 172 Rentier economy, 159 Research and Information System for Developing Countries (RIS), 304 Resource constraints, 72 Responsibility to Protect (R2P), 219 Return of geopolitics, 2 Revanchist foreign policy, 3 Revisionist powers, 49 Revisionist states, 49 Rhi-Tiddim Road, 324 Right-wing populism, 50 Right-wing populist forces, 44 Right-wing populists, 43 Rimland, 276 Rise of China, 148 Rogue donor, 64 Rule-based order, 67, 68, 120, 123 Rules based international order, 63 Russia, 3, 40, 104, 116, 117, 124, 137 as global power, 99 counter sanctions by, 134 sanctions against, 104, 134, 139 veto, 136 war against Ukraine, 129, 295 Russian aggression in Ukraine, 216 annexation of Crimea, 56 crude oil, 117 gas, 138 grain blockade, 139 invasion of Georgia, 3 invasion of Ukraine, 6, 7, 9, 70, 93, 104, 173, 176, 177, 181, 237 oil and gas, 140 revanchism, 3 Russian Federation, 3 Russia-Ukraine conﬂict, 122, 132 Russia-Ukraine war, 49, 114–118, 123–125 Russo-Ukrainian war, 294 Rwanda, 222 Rwandan crisis, 220 S Sagarmala Project, 122, 284, 304 Sahel, 95 Sanction(s), 26, 55, 137, 176, 179 and interdependence, 154 as geoeconomic instruments, 148, 154 busters, 157, 158, 160, 164 effectiveness of, 153 efﬁcacy of, 151 regime, 176, 179 settlement, 148, 163, 165 utility and efﬁcacy, 156 Saudi Arabia, 99, 174, 185 Scholvin, Sören, 56 Seaborne trade, 279 Sea Lanes of Communications (SLOCs), 120, 281, 286, 326 Seaport development, 327 Sea Ports, 323 Sea power, 276, 279 Securitisation, 65

348 INDEX Securitisation, of migration, 195 Security agenda, 195 Security and Growth for All in the Region (SAGAR), 122 Security Council, 62 Security provider, 121 Security sector, 196 Seleka rebellion, 98 Senkaku/Diaoyu Islands, 252, 278 Shandong, 265 Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO), 265, 276 Shangri La Dialogue, 284 Shwe, 327 Sichuan, 278 Silk Road, 263 Silk Road Economic Belt, 248 Sinamale Bridge, 266 Singapore-Kunming Rail Link (SKRL), 261, 267 Singapore Strait, 245 Singapore Summit (2018), 156 Sino-Indian relations, 238 Sino-Pakistan relationship, 267 Sino-Vietnam relations, 250 SIPRI, 75 Sittwe Port, 324, 327 Smart sanction, 153 South Africa, 4, 297, 310 South Africa Dialogue Forum, 63 South Asia, 77, 120, 121, 282, 320 South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC), 266, 320 South Asian Covid Initiative, 266 South Caucasus, 3, 104 South China Sea, 120, 228, 231, 235, 237, 245, 282, 288 Southeast Asia, 121, 158, 258, 267, 277 Southeast Asian neighbours, 237 Southeast Asian region, 243 Southeast Asian regionalism, 270 Southern Asia, 3 Southern Economic Corridor (SEC), 260 South Korea, 158 South-South Cooperation (SSC), 4, 63, 258, 291 South Sudan, 95 Sovereignty, as responsibility, 218 Sovereign Wealth Funds, 185 Special Economic Zone (SEZ), 327 Special military operations, 131, 143 Spratly archipelago, 245 Spratly Islands, 282 Spratlys, 245 Sri Lanka, 122 Stabilisation, 198 State-led capitalism, 3 State sovereignty, 199 State trading companies (STCs), 158 Stilwell Road, 324 Strait of Hormuz, 178, 286 Strait of Malacca, 249, 278, 280 Strategic ambivalence, 117 Strategic concerns, 250 Strategic power, 171 Strategic priorities, 56 Strategic raw materials, 120 Strategic triangle, 281 String of pearls, 25 Structural indeterminacy, 7 Structural Realists, 232 Sub-regionalism, 270 Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA), 77, 94, 95, 303 Sudan, 96 Sudanese Pound exchange rate, 294 Suez Canal Crisis, 150 Supply chain(s), 49, 71, 117, 118, 130 bottlenecks, 181 disruptions, 180, 182 management, 125

INDEX 349 routes, 119 Supply routes, 121 Sustainable emission targets, 188 Sweden, 132 SWIFT, 73 Swing power, 237 Swing states, 49 Switzerland, 296 Sword of Iron, 100 Syria, 3, 136, 222 Systemic complexity, 6, 9 T Tactical nuclear weapons, 175 Taiwan, 105, 120, 140, 231, 235 Taiwan Strait, 245 Targeted sanctions, 161 Tariff rates, 305 Technological revolution, 113 Terrorism, 115, 124, 159 state sponsor of, 157 Thailand, 259 Thucydides Trap, 4 Tiananmen crisis, 231 Togo, 310 Tolerance Warfare, 60 Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA), 285 Trade ﬁnance in Africa, 310 Trade restrictions, 55 Trade sanctions, 73 Tran Dai Quang, 250 Transnational crimes, 197 Transnational Organised Crime (TOC), 196 Transnational threats, 120 Trans-Paciﬁc Partnership (TPP), 60, 257 Treaty of Amity and Cooperation (TAC), 246 Trump, Donald, 156 Tshisekedi, Félix, 94 Tuareg, 96 Turkey, 103, 104 Turkmenistan, 104 U Uganda, 94 Ukraine, 3, 177 EU candidate status, 135 Ukraine war, 103, 181 UN Commodity Trade Statistics, 72 Uncontrolled migration, 200 UNCTAD World Investment Report (2022), 293, 294 Undesirable migrants, 201 Unequal global trade, 64 UN General Assembly, 136 UN Human Rights Monitoring Mission (Ukraine), 133 Unilateral sanctions, 155, 157 Unipolarity, 39, 154 Unipolar moment, 57 United Arab Emirates (UAE), 185, 295 United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), 63 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS III), 246 United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), 192 United Nations General Assembly (UNGA), 293 United Nations High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR), 140, 206, 217 United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), 96 United Nations Security Council, 136

350 INDEX United Nations (UN), 3, 61, 210, 221 United States (US), 122, 123, 180, 276 Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR), 192 UN Protocols on Smuggling and Trafﬁcking, 202 Unregulated ﬁshing, 61 Unrestricted War, 60 UN sanctions, 157 UN Secretary-General, 45 UN Security Council, 212 UN Security Council Resolution 688, 218 UN system, 45 UN u , 321 Uppsala Conﬂict Data Program (UCDP), 76 US-China rivalry, 237 US-China trade war, 7 US hegemony, 148 US narrative of Indo-Paciﬁc, 259 US Navy, 280 US preponderance, 281 US retreat from Afghanistan, 7 USS Enterprise, 279 US strategy, 123 V Vaccine Maitri initiative, 291 Value chains, 26, 183 Van Don-Mong Cai highway, 250 Variable sum game, 319 V asudhaiva Kutumbakam, 25 Velena Airport, 266 Venezuela, 158, 174 Venezuelan state, 156 Vietnam, 119, 259, 260 Violent armed conﬂict, 223 Violent extremism, 198 Violent extremist organisations, 198 W Wagner group, 94, 96, 136 War against the West, 135 War and economics, 105 War crimes, 133, 136 War expenditure, 87 War of attrition, 3, 129 War on terror, 25 War with China, 278 Wa State Army, 327 Weaponisation of energy, 174, 177, 178 of energy resources, 172, 173, 176, 179, 187 of geoeconomic instruments, 9, 148 of trade, 26 Weaponisation of everything, 58, 62, 65 Weaponisation of interdependence, 58, 65 Weaponised interdependence, 58, 59, 148 Wen Jibao, 286 West Asia, 121 West Bank, 100 Western-led liberal world order, 125 Western liberal order, 124 Western liberal world order, 114 Western Paciﬁc, 282 Western sanctions, 94, 328 Westphalian sovereignty, 44 Wholly Owned Subsidiary (WOS), 308 Wigell, Mikael, 56 Win-win cooperation, 271 WMD, 152 Wolf warrior approach, 235 Wolf warrior diplomacy, 4, 25, 244 World Bank, 75

INDEX 351 World Development Indicators (WDI), 75 World Food Programme (WFP), 139 World Health Organization (WHO), 62 World Summit Outcome, 219 World Trade Organization (WTO), 227, 285, 304, 318 World War II, 47 Wuhan, 238 X Xi Jinping, 99, 228, 236, 238, 239, 244, 254, 262, 270, 325 Chinese Dream, 25 era, 228, 231, 232 Xinjiang, 269, 283 Y Yellen, Janet, 186 Yemen, 3 Yunnan, 248, 259, 278, 283, 322, 325, 328 Z Zaporizhzhia, 138 Zero-COVID-19 policy, 239 Zheng Bijian, 229 Zimbabwe, 186 Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali, 161